TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT VII

Our stay in Phuket was brief indeed. As soon as we had anchored, we went ashore and borrowed a car and driver from Mr. R. Kanjana-Vanit, an engineer for the Tongkah Harbour Tin Co., and a Stanford alumnus. With this, we were able to make a few necessary purchases, telephone the Embassy in Bangkok, and clear through Customs in short order, so that exactly four hours after dropping the hook we pulled it up again and were off for the Butang Islands, or so we thought. However, the dispatch with which we had discharged our business in Phuket, and our consequent early departure, gave us more time than we had anticipated. There was no point in arriving at the Butang Islands before morning; nights are for traveling. How should we use the few hours that had practically been presented to us as a gift? On the eastern horizon was an island of fantastic profile and intriguing* name, Koh Phi Phi on one chart and Goh Pipidon on another. Not stopping to worry about variations in transliteration of Thai place names, we changed course and headed for it.

Ko Phi Phi (or Goh Pipidon, if you prefer) stole our hearts. Vertical or even overhanging limestone cliffs rose sheer from the sea for hundreds of feet and were capped with a dense green growth. Here and there on their faces were flimsy bamboo scaffolds, used by the natives to invade the shallow caverns for the collection of the indispensable ingredient of that oriental delicacy, bird's nest soup. In a deep bay between two spectacular headlands we found good anchorage facing a long crescent of white sand in front of a long crew-cut line of coconut palms. Boats were over the side in an instant and we headed for the beach. Some of us collected molluscs in the shallows just off shore; others explored the land briefly and tried to contact the natives, but without much luck. They were interested in us, and a few collected to watch us from a distance but none would approach closely. Even the children were too shy, which is most unusual. Darkness began to settle far too soon, and we returned to the ship and were off to keep our schedule, sorry to have to leave one of the lovliest places we have yet seen.

Next morning we anchored off Pulo Tenga in the Butang Group and worked a reef that yielded many goodies. I used a very little fish poison in a pool about three feet wide, six feet long, and not more than six inches deep high up on the exposed reef. It yielded about twenty-five species. Halimeda for Dr. Colinvaux was plentiful in the area; colorful sponges gave Dr. Rutzler all of the material he could handle; Drs. Rosewater and Kohn found a very rich and varied molluscan fauna; while Mr. Gill was pleased with the birds that he collected on shore. Leaving at dusk we were at Penang the next morning.

Penang, "The Pearl of the Orient," is an island a couple of miles off the mainland, with the strait between offering excellent shelter for shipping. Established centuries ago as a bunkering and supply station on the route between India and the Far East, and as a stronghold against pirates, the city of Georgetown (practically always spoken of as Penang) waxed fat on trade, and its beautiful streets lined with pretentious mansions reflects its wealth. Here we took on fuel and water, purchased supplies, had some work done on the machinery, and took a break to see the sights. Mr. H. T. Pagden, retired Chief Entomologist of Malay, appointed himself my personal host and guide during our stay and did much to make my visit interesting and pleasant. Providing a car, he took me around the town and entirely around the island. A keen general naturalist, he was able to point out all sorts of fascinating things. He knew the birds and the plants; he showed me some marvelously camouflaged nests of spiders on tree trunks,* and of trap-door spiders in the ground; through field glasses we watched, from a distance of about fifty yards, a sea otter eating a fish, swimming, running around over the rocks, and generally being himself; best of all, when I mentioned that one of my ambitions was to see a live caecilian (burrowing worm-like amphibians that few American zoologists have seen), he took me to a spot where I was able to collect several of them. One afternoon he arranged for me to meet Dr. H. A. Reid, of the Penang General Hospital. Dr. Reid is the Director of the Snake and Venom Research Institute, and is the world's leading authority on snake bite and its treatment. I was particularly interested in the sea-snake antivenene that he has recently developed, because we shall be working for at least a year or more in the areas where sea snakes are common. He gave most generously of his time, discussed snakes and snake bites in fascinating detail, showed us through his laboratories where we saw many kinds of sea snakes, cobras, kraits, etc., had a technician milk a viper for its venom, allowed us to watch a python eating, and finally gave me three valuable reprints for the ship's library. It was a most stimulating and instructive meeting.

In the evening of-September 13th, we left Penang, stopped briefly at Langkawi next morning, but found that conditions there were not very good for collecting. We cut short our stay and ran for Pulo Tenga, which we knew from experience was good, and arrived in time for a couple of hours work on the reef in the late afternoon. Temptation to revisit beautiful Ko Phi Phi was too much for us, and at 0630 next day we arrived in time to spend the entire morning working there. At noon we left for Phuket, hoping to clear for Indonesia that afternoon. This would have been possible except for the fact that there was a telegram waiting for me with the request that I call the American Embassy in Bangkok. When I reached them, I learned that there was a mixup in our arrangements for the Indonesian cruise, and a number of messages had to be sent back and forth between Phuket, Bangkok and Djakarta before the matter was straightened out. It took the entire weekend to solve the trouble and instead of leaving Friday night, we did not get away until Monday afternoon.

Since we had a commitment to pick up an Indonesian scientist in Kotaradja, on the northwestern tip of Sumatra, on Tuesday, November 19th, the delay in Phuket necessitated cancelation of our plans to work in deep water in the Andaman Sea. Although we made the run without interruption for any investigations, we did not arrive at Olehleh, the harbor of Kotaradja, until after sunset on Tuesday, and were late for our meeting.

Next morning, entrance formalities were completed very quickly and smoothly, and we found the local authorities to be most courteous and helpful. Our Indonesian guest came on board, and I was delighted to discover that he was Kesijan Romimohtarto, who had been with us on the Indonesian segment of our Pacific crossing. He had been a very pleasant and helpful colleague before, and it was good to see him again. He and some of the local naval personnel and the Harbor Master escorted me on a courtesy call on Governor Aly Hasjmi. I found him to be a very impressive figure of a man, who received me cordially. Over tea we exchanged pleasantries and I invited him to inspect the ship. Unfortunately, his duties did not permit it that afternoon but he will try to visit us when we return in December.

The countryside around Kotardja was beautiful, with coconut plantations interspersed with the lush green of young rice paddies, and the whole backed by impressive volcanic cones. One gained the impression that it was a land of plenty. However, our primary interest was the sea and we were impatient to be off. Fortunately, our first target lay close by, and we were able to do an afternoon's work on Pulo Boenta. It was interesting enough to have engaged our attention for a longer period, but we decided that it was best to utilize the night for the rather long run to Pulo Simueloe, or Pulau Simuelur (another trans-literative discrepancy). There followed a riotous phantasmagoria of beautiful islands that tend to melt into one another in my memory: Pulo Bunan, Pulo Penju; Pulo Milila; Pulau Nias; Pulo Bai; Pulo Masa, Pulo Balibo. Each one yielded at least something to the ship's growing treasure trove, most of them tribute in good measure. In between islands or from the ship at anchor come such oddments as squids from around the night light, or sea snakes, or tunas from trolling, or treasures from trawling, including pogonophorans, or our gigantic pycnogonid (a sea spider with a spread of about two feet), while plankton hauls bring us pteropods and other curious creatures too numerous to mention. I feel somewhat as Cortez must have felt when confronted with Montezuma's hoard of gold--overwhelmed. I believe everyone on board feels much the same way. On the Pacific crossing, we
occupied sixty-one biological stations; on this cruse we have passed the forty mark already, and most of the stations are compound, including different types of collecting in the same area. And still the material rolls in.

The fantastic shapes and colors encountered on the endless coral reefs have now become so commonplace that I am a bit numb. However, a few experiences not concerned with marine biology stand out. While at Pulau Simueloe, Kasijan, Di Salvo and I, having heard a report from one of the returning parties of many orchids on small Pulo Bunan, decided to have a quick look at them. Just as we were about to land, it began to rain. The small boat offered no shelter, but I thought that the jungle might. How mistaken I was! The heavens opened up and the dense foliage simply concentrated the individual drops into innumerable streams that were impossible to dodge. Within five minutes, none of us had a dry stitch on us and our shoes were full of water. However, it was warm and not uncomfortable, and merrily we sloshed along trails that had become small rivers, climbed trees in the face of dashing shower baths, had a marvelous time, and returned in about half an hour with ten different species of orchids.

On Pulau Nias we found the reef to be extremely abrupt and close to shore, the surf was breaking heavily against it, the water so turbid that visibility was reduced to one foot or less, in short, working conditions were impossible. The only way to get on shore was through the mouth of a small stream, and as we rounded the first bend of this, only a couple of hundred yards from the sea, we were surrounded by crowds of natives. They were an interesting lot, some of them in European clothes, some in native dress, a few with tatooed faces, or with bright red lips from beetle-nut chewing. One, in particular, was grand, and I suspect that he had adorned himself for our benefit. He wore an elaborately embroidered vest of many colors and carried a kris with a handsomely carved handle in an elaborately decorated brass-bound scabbard. Appended was a sphere of woven rattan about as big as an indoor baseball and garnished with crocodile teeth, each about three inches long. With Kesijan acting as interpreter, I found out that he had inherited the kris from his father. It would have looked very nice hanging on my wall at home, but, unfortunately, it was not available. With the help of the local populace we collected a few molluscs from the river and made a rather unsuccessful poison station. Then we invited the chief and a few others out to the ship for lunch. When we brought them back, we visited their village briefly. It was on the steep hillside bordering the stream and was reached by means of a series of stone steps. The houses were of a type that I have never seen before. Built of wood, with mortise and tenon joints, secured by pegs, there was not a nail in the lot. The main rooms were elevated and supported by nicely curved beams which extended well out from the building, while the walls leaned outward at an angle of about fifteen degrees. The upper half of each end wall was a long, window screened with a wooden lattice work. The effect was very decorative, and the whole gave somewhat the impression of the poop of an Eighteenth century galleon. Having made fast friends with the entire village by giving them rides in the Boston whalers and presenting them with Polaroid pictures of themselves, we had a hard time getting away and returning to the ship.

In the lovely Batu Islands, where the magnificent coral reefs engaged our attention for three full days, Captain Olsen and I decided that we had earned a couple of hours off and so we took one of the small boats to explore the mangroves surrounding Pulo Masa. Selecting an indentation in the solid front, we followed it into a twisting bayou which narrowed as it extended inland. Almost at once, we found ourselves in an eerie world of green shadow, stalked roots forming intertwining pyramids, brown water bedecked with floating dead leaves, and an oppressive silence broken at long intervals by the raucous call of some unknown bird. As the waterway narrowed, we cut off the motor and pulled ourselves along by the foliage on either side until we could go no farther. Here and there we stopped to peer into the impassable vegetation around us, to listen in the motionless air, or to collect some of the epiphytic orchids and ferns that grew on the mangroves within easy reach. Our little excursion gave us a sense of mystery and peace, somewhat like the experience one might gain from an hour of contemplation in an ancient cathedral. It didn't advance science at all, but it was good for our souls!
