Te Vega Cruise 10 Narrative (No Installment Number).  This was originally hand-written and no author mentioned.  

On her return to the United States after working in far distant waters for more than two years, Te Vega required a very extensive overhaul.  This occupied longer time than originally estimated.  As a result, Expedition 10 opened on schedule but prior to the final acceptance of the vessel after sea trials and the major questionable item was the trawling which had been entirely inoperable when the ship retuned from foreign waters, and which the University did not consider to have been re-paired according to specifications.  The indoctrination cruises for the students thus became sea trials for the ship.  
Off Monterey Bay on March 13, 1966, when the ship should already have been embarked on one of her longer cruises, the winch suffered a major failure.  It was only by taking this section of the overhaul out of the hands of the original contractor and returning the entire winch console to the manufacturer that satisfaction could be obtained. 
It was necessary to occupy the interim between the break-down of the winch and its final return as a satisfactorily operating piece of machinery by trawling in the shallow waters of Monterey Bay from the small boat, Tage, taking hydrographic stations and plankton tows by means of a jury rig on the Te Vega, and working in the laboratory.   The spring quarter was half over before a real start could be made on the programed activities.  
An attempt to run a transect perpendicular to the coast consisting of five hydrographic stations evenly spaced, with correlated biological samples from various depths at each station could be only about half completed.  Winds of gale force and very heavy seas rendered work extremely hazardous and the cruise was terminated at approximately 37? N Lat. 131? W. Long. 
After working up the material and data collected on the offshore cruise, the ship sailed for the waters of southern California and took 6 hydrographic stations and 24 tucker-trawl hauls in the region between Pt. Conception and San Diego.  

 



