TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE--INSTALLMENT 4

On the morning of Friday, September 6th, we tied up to the new wharf at Honiara on the north shore of Guadalcanal. This seat of government for the British Solomon Islands is a bustling little town with a great deal of building going on. We had intended to conclude our business of clearing as soon as possible and had hoped to depart about noon. However, this was before we met Mr. John C. Grover, Chief Geologist of the Department of Geological Surveys, who climbed on board practically as soon as it was legal to do so. He had other ideas, and was most convincing and insistent. By offering to drive the faculty around town and the adjacent countryside, to provide us with lunch at his home, to show us what the Geological Survey was doing, and to provide a land rover and driver to take the students to Red Beach, to Henderson Field, up into the foothills, around town and to his laboratory, he made his point, and we agreed to delay our departure until 1800 hours. We are glad that we did.

Mr. Grover has been on Guadalcanal for 13 years and was a mine of information about its history, its people, its political situation, its natural resources, its future potential--everything. A man of driving energy, he has an amazing geological survey going. With only a few white colleagues, backed by Micronesians whom he has trained as technicians himself, his department is working the local geology from a number of different angles. He has managed to establish a group of laboratories with equipment that one might expect to find in a good university, has gained the cooperation of geologists in Australia and America, has talked the United Nations and London out of almost as much money as he needs, has convinced the British Navy to assist in a gravimetric survey of the islands and intervening waterways with the frigate COOK, has arranged free color printing of his maps by the British Army, and in general is doing quite well.

One of the interesting things that he showed us in his museum was a photograph of a small new-born volcano that appeared off the southern coast of Vangunu Island in 1960. He said that it had since died and disappeared, but that his seismograph had, a few days ago, registered an earthquake of Richter force 7 with its epicenter very close to the locality and that the volcano might well be active again. He suggested that, since it was almost on our route to Kieta, it might be interesting for us to look the area over. The final consequence of all this was that when we left Honiara that evening Mr. Grover was aboard as our vulcanologist and we set our course to the south of the New Georgia Group instead of going straight up The Slot. Then our amazing guest pulled another surprise by announcing that he had brought some kodachromes with him, and we were treated to an unexpected but perfectly fascinating lecture, superbly illustrated, on the geology of the Solomons, stressing particularly seismology and vulcanology.

Shortly before noon the next day, we approached our target and the fathometer was working very well for a change. I watched the trace as it began to climb from about 9000 meters, getting gradually steeper. In the last mile, it rose in a steady line from 6000 to 20 meters. Although this is only a 24° slope (which is plenty steep enough) it showed up as about 60° on the echogram. It was terrifying to watch it swing up out of nowhere, reaching for our keel, and when it began to merge with the outgoing signal I was scared enough to call to Captain Olsen to stop the ship. He did so, although he had the situation well in hand with lookouts on the spreaders and his own navigational fathometer working. We could spot no sign of present volcanic activity, but we did find an area of slick and slightly discolored water, undoubedly due to upwelling reaching the surface. We cruised back and forth over the area, finding the minimum depth to be 9 fathoms and getting some spectacular contours on our echograms. Several tries with the mud snapper got us only about a tablespoon full of black sand. Then we tried the small dredge and got up some gravel and stones of the same material, all basaltic and without the slightest evidence of anything growing on or among the fragments.

After spending all of the time we could afford, we cruised downstream to the westward a few miles seeking sufficient depth for a deep hydrographic station, and then followed this with a plankton haul at dusk. It was tremendously rich, probably as a result of upwelling induced by the nascent volcano that we had been exploring and had dubbed Te Vega Seamount, since it had no name on the charts. Among the myriads of small copepods, mysids and amphipods in the haul were lots of the grotesque larve of stomatopods and spiny lobsters, and the glass-like leptocephali of eels of several different kinds. There were also several cubomedusae, forms that we were not so happy to see; these are among the most venomous stinging organisms in the sea, and there are several cases reported where they have caused human deaths in about three minutes.

That evening, Mr. Grover gave another illustrated lecture entitled "A Typical Day in the Life of a Government Geologist." I doubt that it was really typical, but it was certainly interesting and made all of us appreciate the difficulties of working in really rugged tropical areas without any roads and where the annual rainfall is 300 inches and the vegetation so dense that practically nowhere, except in stream beds, can one see a rock or a square inch of soil. All of us would have liked to have been with him in the fantastic moss forests of the higher elevations, of which he showed several good shots, but I don't know how many of us could have stood the gaff of getting there.

At dawn on September 8th, we received from Mr. Grover three long reports on his Solomon Island Surveys (all that have been published so far) for the ship's library; we gave him in return and to show our appreciation, the echograms and samples from Te Vega Seamount, sent a small boat to put him ashore at Munda, from which place he had to find his way back home as best he could, and wished him the best of luck and every success in his exciting work.

Later in the morning, as we were cruising through Ferguson Passage, Dr. Thompson used the time between the regular lecture and lunch to review for the students the hydrographic data that we had collected on our more or less meridianal passage from Hawaii to Fiji and to explain its significance. The discussion was interrupted by an urgent summons to deck. As we hurriedly piled out, we found ourselves in the middle of a pod of six humpback whales. They were a great sight, but we were too late to get a real close-up view of the one that had been within 10 feet of the ship minutes earlier. Nevertheless, the spouts all around, the black backs arching above the water and the show of flukes when they sounded was appreciated by one and all. In the afternoon, as we continued up Vella Gulf between Gizo and Kolobongara Islands, there was plenty of evidence of high fertility of the water. The water itself was discolored a reddish brown, frigate birds were present in unusual numbers and other birds were working over the water here and there, sometimes some unknown fish would jump high in the air and flying fishes skittered out from our bow. For a few minutes we had with us hundreds of dolphins playing and leaping clear of the water—a great sight. This area, also, could have engaged our attention for a long time, but we had to push on for the rather tricky Bougainville Strait that lay ahead.

On the morning of Monday, September 9th, as we were heading for the rather narrow opening in the fringing reef off Kieta, on the north shore of Bougainville, sudden heavy rain concealed our visual landmarks and blanked out the radar so that we had to stand off for a time. When things finally cleared up, we sailed into the lovely harbor that made someone remark that each port of call seemed to be more beautiful than the previous one. Heavily wooded islands and peninsular, with glistening white beaches and mat huts with thatched roof here and there, lay on both sides, while behind the little town directly ahead rugged and precipitous mountains of an unbelievable green, crossed by horizontal fragments of grey rain clouds, reared up to a jagged skyline dominated by a thumb-like volcanic plug.

As soon as we had anchored, an outrigger canoe, pad-died by two natives and bearing three white men under two umbrellas and one poncho, set out from shore. They were the local port authorities and Gene Ogan, a graduate student of anthropology from Harvard who has been here almost a year doing his field work. As soon as the official entry had been completed, we pulled our hook and sailed around the western peninsula to a new anchorage in Arawa Bay, where we were welcomed by Mr. and Mrs. F. R. McKillop and their four children.

The McKillops were very kind in providing ground transportation for all who could get ashore, as well as light refreshments. We inspected their thousand-acre coconut and cocoa plantation, enjoyed the hospitality of their beautiful home, swam in their pool and marveled at what well may be the finest private orchid collection in the world. Rows of trees, covering at least a couple of acres, were covered with orchid plants, many of them species from Bougainville and New Guinea, South America and Asia, many of them imported hybrids from the United States and Australia, and many of them Mr. McKillops own crosses. The faculty and Captain Olsen were invited to dinner and enjoyed a most pleasant evening.

Bright and early on Tuesday morning, we all scattered out for biological work, some diving on the deeper coral, some concentrating on collecting molluscs, while the most interesting work was an independent project on a transect perpendicular to shore, carried out by Mary Ann Jordan, Mike Hadfield and Paul Schroeder. These students, raking through the sand of the extreme shallows on the beach itself, combing the eelgrass in a couple of feet of water, turning over dead, coral slabs to see what was under them, exploring the interspecies of living branched corals, got so many varied forms of invertebrates in about the first 15 yards along their stretched line that they were unable to pay any attention to the forms found farther out. Ordinary clams and huge brittle stars, pin-cushion starfishes and flat green nudibranches, pipe fishes and snails, tectibranches and sea cucumbers, this and that, fill practically all of the available buckets and trays on board. The list, recorded with the exact location of each organisms as it was collected or seen, covered many pages, and I don't know when they will be able to get it all worked up, I intend to see to it that each future class carries out at least one similar survey. It is impossible to leave this subject without mentioning two interesting fisher that they found living in symbiosis with invertebrates. One was the well-known clown fish, Amphiprion, with striking coloration of pearly white and orange vertical bars, that was found snuggling down among the stinging tentacles of the anemone Stoichactis. The other was a specimen of Carapus about a foot long. This slender fish was living in the digestive tract of the green sea cucumber Stichopus chloronotis, with its head sticking out of the cloacal opening. There is no end to the fascinating material that we find at each station, be it along shore or in the open sea, and we are barely scratching the surface.

We learned that the good people of Kieta had gathered to welcome us on Sunday when we were supposed to arrive, and that when on Monday we stayed only about an hour and a half before leaving for Arawa Plantation they were doubly disappointed. Therefore, when we received a formal invitation to a specially planned affair at the Kieta Club on Tuesday evening; we could not refuse. The ship made the short trip back to Kieta at dusk, and we once more enjoyed the outgoing cordiality and hospitality so characteristic of these islands.

Mr. McKillop had had a breakdown in his cocoa-drying machinery and had chartered a plane to bring a man out from Rabaul to do some stainless steel welding. This ill wind blew us some good. Having a chartered plane on his hands, Mr. McKillop invited four of our company, the faculty and Mary Ann Jordan, to take an early morning flight over Bougainville. To be near the airfield in the morning, we all took a blood curdling ride out to Aropa Plantation in a galloping land rover, where we were the guests of Mr. Robin McKay in his fabulous home on the top of a steep bluff. We got practically no sleep, but we did enjoy his refreshments, his talk, his guided tour of only about 20 minutes to his copra shed and dryer, his cocoa and rubber processing plants, and most of all his tremendous view across the tops of the coconut palms and the broad Pacific almost to South America.

After a hearty breakfast we rode down the short distance to the air field and were soon away, over the ship, the town, Arawa Plantation and off to the high mountains with their rugged terrain and deep dense cloak of green, pockmarked here and there by the clearings and huts of the scattered native villages. Ahead loomed the active volcano, Mt. Bagana, 6560 feet high, and still farther on a second one, Mt. Balbi, reaching 10,171 feet into the sky. We circled them both, flying almost directly over the crater rims and getting a good strong whiff of sulfur fumes; we circled again lower down and saw steam rising from fumeroles and smoke from the frozen lava cascades. We looked down on smaller inactive craters, one with a small malachite-green lake in it, and we were struck by the dead grey of the cinder cones, so incongruous in this lush green land. We circled inside one crater, close over the surface of Billy Mitchell Lake, reputed to contain hot water. We came back close to the spine of the island and played tag with numbers of volcanic plugs and almost brushed our wings against the dense foliage clothing the sheer walls, and then we slid down across the jungle and the coastal plantations to the air strip once more. One of the finest hours any of us had ever had was over. Since we are here to study biology and not vulcanology, my conscience hurt a little bit—but not too much. I promise not to go chasing volcanos again.

While we had been away, there had been a number of visitors on board, including a class of young men from the Catholic school, who were impressively knowledgable. When we had gently shooed everyone off, we got under way again and in the afternoon sailed through a pod of whales of undetermined kind, estimated to number up to 50. I was asleep at the time and nobody awakened me!

On Thursday, September 12th, after the final lecture for most of the students had occupied the morning, they were subjected to a written examination in the afternoon. It was a hot and sticky day and everyone considered it to be an indignity, but I thought it necessary to get some assessment of the effectiveness of our teaching. For this first group, on what must be considered a shakedown cruise, the trip was of only nine weeks duration. Subsequent voyages will average about two weeks longer. Nevertheless, in spite of our early fumblings and mishaps, I consider the experiment a success. The students, and the faculty too, have gained an impression of the size and staggaring complexity of the ocean, of its multiform inhabitants, of the tremendous differences in the habitats they occupy and of the fierce struggle for existance that they endure. Varying impressions have assaulted us in no logical sequence as we progressed from temperate shorelines to open water and back to shore again, as we have worked the coral regions, the mangrove swamps, the surface layers and the deeps. In the last couple of weeks,* through the agency of the continuing lectures, previously isolated bits and pieces have begun to fall into place nicely and to constitute a logical whole. Every one has worked hard and for long hours and fully earned the credits that they will get. In my opinion, the cruise has been a success, and the students who are able to continue with us to Zamboanga or to Singapore will get an additional worthwhile dividend of similar but ever varying experience and information. Score up 1 for TE VEGA!

Bolin
