TE VEGA EXPEDITION
GENERAL NARRATIVE--INSTALLMENT #15

Our departure from beautiful Pulau Gaya was occasioned by imminent exhaustion of fresh water supplies, and perhaps slightly by the reports of pirates 25 miles away. This brought a Malaysian police patrol boat to our side the last night at anchorage; its lights at the reef passage gave us confidence all night.

The run up to Zamboanga took us past the north end of Sibutu, and the mountains at Port Bongao, both originally planned instead of Pulau Gaya. But the latter proved a fine substitute, and we do not regret the last minute change, no matter how occasioned. In the Sulu Sea we tried a mid-water trawl at midnight, only to find that the hydraulic winch did not function. This probably resulted from taking it apart for inspection in Singapore; air or dirt got into the delicate mechanism; it has not been cured even as far as Rabaul.

Zamboanga took a busy four days to refuel, rewater, launder, and do a little collecting--the latter on the last day at Santa Cruz Island, just across the channel from town. Zamboanga was colorful and interesting, very different from modern Sandakan and Rabaul—both built since the war. It is a great center for the shipment of tropical shells to collectors and shops all over the world. It was amusing to see the Moros try to see US coral and shell from their outriggers! We visited a couple of their fishing villages—which are literally OVER the water. If the monkeys have no tails, they are at least aquatic.

Lectures on care in using water, based on the shortening of our stay in Borneo, had their good effect, and on the long nine-day run over open water to Rabaul, we did much better. Since the winch still was obdurate, and two good plankton nets were lost on the run, no collecting or observing could be done. In any case the water was deep blue, and little life was apparent in it. Not even floating rafts of Sargassum were seen; the South China Sea was much richer.

To keep from boredom, a series of talks were organized, first by the faculty (including authoritative information on molluscs by Professor Yonge on things not yet in the text books)--then by the students on various topics. The small library was well searched through for information.

A seasonal northwest squall sped us into the wonderful harbor of Rabaul, still studded with a few wrecks, even though nearly a hundred have been salvaged--by the Japanese, of course! Caves still dot the hillsides of this war time stronghold, now peaceful and clean under very efficient Australian Territorial administration. Even the harbor proved to be a good collecting region, especially the spectacular bee-hive rocks which suddenly were uplifted around 1870. Blinks was startled by the abundance of Valonia ventricose, with some of the cells as big as tennis balls. Cohen made many fine fish-poisoning stations, and guesses he may have collected some 600 species of tropical fish so far on cruise 6; certainly many are new to science. We also spent one day on the Duke of York Islands, east of Rabaul; here shallow, very clear water, yielded somewhat different organisms from the volcanically enriched Rabaul Bay—in which pieces of pumice are everywhere afloat. Most of the staff and students climbed the small active volcano a few miles from town, and inspected the lava flow which keeps the sea water at well over 40° C. at its foot. Yet a few meters away there are some snails, and the alga Padina.

As I write, we are expecting the arrival of Dr. Torben Wolff from Copenhagen, who is flying through Rabaul on his way to Honiara and Rennel Island. He will be picked up by cruise 7 at one of these places.

Rabaul will be remembered as a place of friendly Australians, interesting natives, and good marine biology. Miss McWilliam, our Australian student, is tempted to come back to it, and work on plankton. Kieta next stop! Then probably Vella Lavella.	____

-Bolin
