TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 19 
Dr. Rolf L. Bolin

At last, on the night of April 26, as Dr. Frost was leading a seminar on the after deck during a rare dry period, we picked up a glow on the distant clouds that meant that the lights of Suva were underneath. Since the authorities would not be available to enter us until morning, we hove to outside and found the passage in by daylight.  It was a relief to tie up to a wharf in quiet water, step ashore and see paved streets with shops, hotels, and all the hurry and bustle of this crossroads of the southwestern Pacific.

Here we were due for an overhaul of an ailing generator and the required parts had not yet arrived. The necessary delay made it important to plan for a program of work in the local area and we gave the students a day and a half of shore leave while we considered the situation, contacted the proper officials for advice and permission to work in the selected areas, and gathered together a few pieces of equipment. The mangroves of Kumbuna Creek were selected for particular investigation. On April 29 and 30 we chose a spot in a small tributary of the creek as our key station and selected three other places for comparison. One was a point farther up the same tributary, the second was the pier of a bridge across the main creek where vertical zonation of the sessile and sedentary organisms was diagram clear, and the third was a mud flat extending out from the edge of the mangroves at a point about half a mile south of the mouth of the creek and separated from it by an island that was almost a peninsula. We hoped that this locality would be less influenced by fresh water than the other stations and would provide an interesting contrast. Collections were made at all of these localities, and notes were made on the distribution and the behavior of the organisms.

Daylight on Monday morning, May 3, was chosen as the time to begin a continuous 26-hour occupation of our key station with periodic visits to the others. Observations were made on the temperature, salinity and oxygen of the surface and bottom waters, the height and the rate of flow of the water throughtout a complete tidal cycle, and of the organisms seen day and night and during high and low water. It would hardly have been possible to select a more disadvantageous and uncomfortable period in which to do the work since it rained all the time and floods of fresh water poured out of the swamp, not only through the normal channels but everywhere. This probably gave us atypical surface salinities and temperatures, and influenced the behavior of the organisms. No respectable insect would be out in the downpour, and we had no opportunity to use the fine insect net that we had borrowed from the Department of Agriculture, but at least we were spared a mass attack by mosquitoes. Even the hermit crabs appeared to seek shelter from the continuous shower bath by congregating on the under surface of the arching mangrove roots. However, since the residents of Suva claim that there are only two seasons here, the wet season and the rainy season, conditions were undoubtedly normal for a good part of the year. I was proud of the students who endured the discomfort of their six-hour watches in good spirits and without any serious grumbling. The data were taken, the observations were made, and the mass of material is still being worked up.

When the ship arrived in Suva Mrs. Jane Cooper, a local resident and very keen naturalist who is working in cooperation with a team from the University of Hawaii on the problem of fishes that are poisonous to eat, came down to offer whatever assistance she could. She suggested that during the spring tide of May 4 she might lead us on an excursion to a coral reef that had been destroyed by a hurricane in February. At that time almost 50 inches of rain had fallen in the mountains during a 72-hour period, 31 inches of it in one day! The rivers had flooded and left many square miles of the low coastal areas under as much as 10 feet of water. A large part of this flood drained through a new channel of the Wainibokasi River and rushing seaward had subjected a stretch of reef far removed from the normal river mouth to a prolonged freshwater bath. The result was disaster with most of the marine organisms killed and the whole area turned into a rotting odoriferous mess. Two months passage of time had begun the healing process and new pioneer organisms wore moving in to the devastated area, so we thought it would be interesting to have a look at the situation.

On the appointed morning it was not raining and the weather looked more promising than it had for days, so equipped with snorkeling gear, buckets and lunches we piled into a chartered bus for the trip to Wainibokasi Landing, about 30 miles away. There Mrs. Cooper had made arrangements for us to be met by Turagauru, our guide, with speed boat and an outboard-powered punt for the long trip down the river that had caused all the damage. Local protocol demanded that we stop at the mouth of the river to pay our respects to the chief and village elders. Mrs. Cooper had come prepared for this with some yagona root and a whale's tooth for me to present to the chief. Turagauru offered these for me and made a long and evidently flowery speech in Fijian on my behalf, which was well received, judging by the murmurs of approval. The chief then made a speech, and there was ritual chanting punctuated by hand clapping, and then we drank yagona. Yagona is the Fijian name for Kava, the national drink of most of the Pacific Islands. This is made from the root of a shrub, Piper methysticum. In the old days the method of grinding it was to have one or more of the young virgins chew it up and then spit the residue into a bowl. I understand (and hope) that this habit has been discontinued, and that now the roots are pounded. The drink was dipped in half coconut shells from a beautiful old bowl carved from a single piece of wood in the form of a turtle standing on four legs, and was ceremoniously presented to each of us in turn, with a hand clap followed by murmurs of approval when we had downed it. Yagona is supposed to be slightly intoxicating or narcotic, but I noticed no effect after drinking four helpings. It tastes and looks somewhat like soapy water, and I find it curious that several of the local Europeans have developed the habit of drinking it daily.

Formalities ended with a thank you speech by me, translated by the guide, and we piled into the boats once more and made our way to Tomberua Island to inspect the reef in the vicinity, which had been heavily damaged.  Here we were welcomed by Mr. H. J. McHugh, a wealthy Australian who was building a fantastic vacation home in Fijian style, which he invited us to inspect. It consisted of several huts with woven walls and thatched roofs beautifully done with the roof members tied together with sennit by master craftsmen. Coconut and pandanus mats woven in striking patterns, and colorful tapa hangings gave the place just the proper decor. After the first shock, flourescent lights, porcelain sinks with running water, refrigerators, hi-fi sets and flush toilets did not seem out of place.

After a look around we left in two punts for Mambualau Island, considerably farther out, to see if the damage had extended that far. It was a beautiful uninhabited island, although crawling with one of the two species of sea snakes that come out on land. These are rather closely related to the cobras and are extremely venomous, but they are picked up and roughly handled by the natives, even the little children, and they made no attempt to bite. It is said that a couple of hundred years ago the Fijians and the snakes made a pact that neither one would harm the others! Since I do not believe in magic and know that deaths from sea-snake bites are not uncommon in the Malaysian-Indonesian areas, I discouraged our group from handling them. We had a look at the nesting gannets and the frigate birds patrolling the skies above, and then turned our attention to the reef which appeared to be undamaged. Certain portions of it were so green with heavy growth of Cladophora that it looked like a well-kept lawn.

At about four o'clock we noticed that the sky toward the southeast had turned an ugly blue black, and Mrs. Cooper and I began to shout and wave at our scattered party, urging them to return. They were so wide spread and the sound of waves and wind so loud that our efforts were rather ineffective and it took considerable time to get them assembled at the punts. The wind had now begun to blow in earnest and back we went picking our way among the coral heads which were hard to see through the disturbed surface. When we reached the channel we made a mad dash for Tomberua Island, the closest shelter, bailing like made to keep ahead of the water that we shipped and that poured in on us from the horizontal sheets of rain. When we arrived, drenched to the skin, we sought shelter in Mr. McHugh's boathouse to wait for the weather to abate. Instead it continued to get worse, and finally darkness began to fall. At last it began to dawn on us that we could not reach the mainland that night, and this was corroborated by Mr. McHugh and Turagauru.

If one is to be marooned it would hardly be possible to select a better place for it than Tomberua Island. With astonishing hospitality Mr. McHugh first provided gallons of coffee to warm us up, stretched his wardrobe to provide us with dry clothes, produced food and drink for the unexpected and uninvited multitude, and managed to give one a place to sleep under blankets or mats. Although Mr. McHugh had been preparing to leave for Australia next day, and was consequently relative short on supplies, he managed to work miracles in making us comfortable during a perfectly miserable night of howling wind and driving rain. We are all deeply grateful to him for his hospitality.

In the morning the weather was somewhat better although intermittent rain squalls still swept down, and we sot cut for shore and the river. At the landing, the bus that we had ordered for 5:30 the previous evening was patiently waiting for us, much to our surprise. We were back on board the ship in time for lunch, dead tired, but with an experience behind us that we would not have missed for anything.

Since we were still waiting for generator parts that had not arrived, we decided to use a few days for work at Great Astrolabe Reef, about 50 miles south. We left on the morning of the 6th and anchored that afternoon in the shelter of Mbulia Island after a very rough passage. Weather made it impossible to go to the outer barrier reef about five miles from the sheltered anchorage, and we had to content ourselves with making observations and collections on the fringing reefs in the lee of adjacent islands. At the first place we worked the stoney corals were completely overshadowed by alcyonarians in bewildering variety. These soft corals occurred in masses of white, brown, green, purple, and yellow; and they formed spongy blobs, fanciful folded masses, or sent up stubby coarse fingers, all covered with large extended polyps waving in the water currents. It was surprisingly different from anything that we had previously seen, and therefore interesting, but it could not compare in beauty with the fantastic coral gardens of Vanikoro. Later we found good fringing reefs of stoney corals and ran very successful poison stations on the outer and inner margins of these.

During our stay we visited the native village on Mbulia Island and had the pleasure of watching them launch a fleet of outrigger canoes to go to another island to pick up school children returning home. The canoes were quite large, about 30 feet in length, and hollowed from a single log with the gunnels raised by lashing a hand adzed plank to the sides. The sails were raised on shore, and then the canoes were shoved into the surf across a series of logs placed parallel to the shore. As soon as they hit the water the men had to be quick about jumping on board as they took off with astonishing speed in a shower of spray. They were certainly doing well over 10 knots right from the start, with the outriggers rising high above the water and the men scrambling out on them to weigh them down. It was a brave and exciting show.

We were invited to visit the village that evening for yagona drinking and dancing, and most of us went. It was a pleasant and sociable evening but I was disappointed because the yagona drinking was more casual and accompanied by less ceremony than I expected, the music was provided by guitars instead of by native instruments, and the dancing was not Fijian but the twist! It is surprising and depressing how rapidly the fruits of American culture penetrate the odd corners of the globe.

On Sunday, May 9, we returned to Suva and on Monday, while work on the generator got under way, we went back to our key station in the mangroves for fish poisoning. We had not wanted to disturb the area in this manner previously. As usual, it rained, but we did not mind very much as we waded through the thick brown water and mud of the creek dipnetting the groggy fishes as they swirled into visibility at the surface. It was a hectic, wet and dirty job, but it yielded a surprisingly large number of species.
