Additional Narrative Following Cruise 2

The research vessel Te Vega has completed two cruises covering more than 15,000 miles, has taken continuous meteorological observations under way, and occupied about 15 hydrographic and 150 biological stations.  The physical data have been sent to the National Oceanographic Center, and many thousands of biological specimens have been sent to Stanford University and the National Sorting Center for distribution to specialists for further study.  

One Senior Scientist has completed two cruises, eight have completed one, as have 20 graduate students, while five additional Senior Scientists, one from the U.S., one from the British Solomon Islands, two from Indonesia and one from India, have participated as guests for part of a cruise.  Scientific and educational groups have inspected the ship and been given lectures on board at 12 different ports, and the Senior Scientist has presented formal lectures at the University of Malaya, in Kuala Lumpur, and the Universitas Andalas, in Padang.  

The Pacific crossing from San Diego to Singapore was in the nature of a shakedown cruise, and the commitment to undertake work as a vessel of the International Indian Ocean Expedition in October, 1963, necessitated that it be hurried.  Both of these factors reduced its effectiveness but, nevertheless, the cruise demonstrated that the program holds great promise for the future.  The teaching was successful in that the students gained a knowledge and impression of the immensity and complexity of the ocean and the diversity of marine organisms, and of the techniques of attacking oceanographic problems that was far superior to anything they could have experienced on or along shore.  However, the program suffered through the inability, dictated by the commitment to be in Singapore, to stop and pursue any of the numerous interesting research problems that presented themselves.  Only one report (on the hydrography of the passage, with particular emphasis on the equatorial transect) is being prepared for publication.  

The first cruise as a vessel of the I.I.O.E. was entirely successful in so far as the activities of the Senior Scientists were concerned.  However, while the schedule of collecting on as many different islands as possible served the needs of these research systematists for specimens for further study, it had the same effect on the contemplated program for the students as did the necessity for hurrying across the Pacific.  There was never enough time at any one place for an adequate analysis of the environment, or the fluctuation of limiting factors in space ad time, for the evaluation of the in situ behavioristic patterns of the organisms, or of the influence of various species on one another, and other similar matters.  Furthermore, the reduction of the teaching staff from three to one placed such a burden on the remaining faculty member that he could not, in addition to his necessary administrative activities, adequately discharge his duties of supervising the collection of meteorological and hydrographic data, of leading field trips for the observation and collection of marine organisms, or correlating the physico-chemical data with the biological collections, of guiding research projects, and of lecturing on an extremely broad spectrum of oceanographic subjects.  

While the students learned a great deal through assisting the Senior Scientists, and gained knowledge and experience that will be valuable throughout their lives, the formal training program fell far short of being as effective as planned.  This situation will undoubtedly persist during the next two cruises.  

Admitting freely that the accomplishments of the Te Vega to date are not as great as had been hoped, it is not difficult to find the cause; it is the commitment to the International Indian Ocean Expedition.  This commitment has directed the activities toward two different goals, and has robbed the student training and research program of both manpower and a flexible schedule.  However, the accomplishments to date, and the reaction of the student s who have completed the course on board, provide ample evidence that when the Te Vega becomes a free agent in September of this year, the program will, in all respects, live up to its promise.  When the scientific personnel can once more consists of a full complement of faculty and students, and when there is freedom to stop the vessel at any time for the investigation of interesting phenomena or situations (and experience proves that there is no lack of these).  The results should be gratifying.  The Te Vega is uniquely endowed and equipped for the task of seeking out interesting problems in biological oceanography, and for directing the attention of 15 diverse minds toward the solution of these problems in a combination of teaching and research that will represent scientific education at its exciting best.  

