TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 16

The ship was forced to stay in Rabaul for over a week, to make a new collar for the foresail gaff, and (due to engine room flooding) have the air-conditioning motor re-wound. Fortunately facilities for both existed in this busy, modern little Australian town. On the other hand, the town is so small that it does not pollute the waters of its bay, so that very good collecting regions could be reached by the small boats while TE VEGA was at dock. Amongst these were the "Beehives," the volcanic plugs which arose in the middle of the harbor about 1870. The region is one of intense volcanic activity, and one small cone, Matupi, still is smoking, and contributes hot water to the sea at its base. This made an interesting biological situations one alga, Padina (though diminutive) and a littorine snail were living within a few meters of the hot spring. Ah all-day excursion to the Duke of York Islands, in the boat of Pat Roberts, a local character, (who also owned the island at which we landed) yielded shallow water forms. Yonge especially was delighted by the abundance of a mollusc boring in the coral Funqia. Fish poisoning also brought many new specimens, at the edge of the mangroves.

We felt that we learned a great deal about the marine life of New Britain from our enforced delay at Rabaul; and the warm hospitality of the inhabitants, expecially of Monty Stobo, the Burns-Philp manager, will be long remembered. Cars were rented by some of the staff and students for trips to the south and west, including a visit to the agricultural station, where Gordon Dunn recalled the previous visit of TE VEGA.

A short run brought us to Kieta on March 7, with a chance to use the rehabilitated winch along the way. The Singapore dry-dock had cross-connected the arterial and venous systems of the hydraulic lines, and this was only corrected from plans flown out to Rabaul. Color coding (red and blue??) would seem to be indicated by any student of comparative anatomy! Unfortunately (vide infra) the correction was short lived, for the circuit breaker had to be cannibalized due to another accident a week later.

A brief run into Arawa Bay to salute the McKillops, preceded dropping the anchor in Kieta harbor. Formalities were briefly disposed of, since we were still in New Guinea Territory, and the boats went out to work in the afternoon. The nearest Island, Puk-Puk, first attracted one party, while another headed for the reefs. The latter had been tempting us for the past six weeks, since their exposure seemed to promise a real barrier type, with Lithothamnion rampart, so far not seen. Unfortunately, no such rampart was found; but the general coral formation was good, even though the nearby land masses, and heavy rainfall, rendered the water rather turbid. Puk-Puk however, was good for shore collecting, and its spectacular landscape of tall tropical trees, dripping with orchids, and with white cockatoos flitting about, made a rich back drop for our work.

The Kietans supplied (all 30 of the resident Europeans) warm hospitality, which was returned by the ship with a barbecue, scheduled for the beach, but adjourned to the Kieta Club because of heavy rain. Yonge and Blinks will expecially remember this rain, for they were taken out to Arawa bv Mr. McKillop in his Japanese "Land Rover" type of car. The road out seemed rough enough, but after an inch or two of rain had fallen, the rivers were swollen, and running a foot higher on the return trip. The McKillop plantation, one of the largest privately owned in the islands, produces quality cocoa by virtue of its good management.

After four or five days of biological work around Kieta, Yonge and Cohen felt that the region was too much dominated by land masses, and we should seek out a true oceanic atoll before the expedition ceased. The only such place reasonably close appeared to be the Carteret Islands, 90 miles north. On March 12 we headed toward them, hitting rough seas immediately outside the reef. The norwester was really blowing, and the ship tossed and rolled heavily. After dinner ladder shaft, and shorted out the electrical control board. Fortunately the engineer worked under great difficulties, and jerry-rugged a shunt around the rain circuit breaker; so we again had electricity (on which the ship is almost entirely dependent). The storm was too great to face any further and we turned around, re-entering quiet Kieta harbor Saturday morning, to make better repairs (including the cannibalizing of the big circuit breaker of the winch). So we are again without that essential of deep sea operation. Fortunately this cruise centered around coral reefs, or it would indeed have been a wash-out.

Saturday afternoon and evening brought a downpour of rain, some 4 or 5 inches falling, so that the harbor was as brown as the Missouri; but by morning the tides had cleaned it up, and the stream between town and the Catholic Mission was limpid clear on Monday morning. On the latter half day, final trips were made by small boats, and we pulled anchor at 1:00 p.m., for Honiara and the assurance of airplane flights home. It seemed foolish to tempt Neptune further; indeed his warning on Friday probably saved us other troubles, for we learned from a coastal steamer that the anchorage at Carteret (at high tide!) was just the depth of our keel.

As I write we are entering "The Slot," between Choiseul and Vella Lavella. Cruise 1 found the latter region rich in fish, birds and whales We can vouch for the abundance of life as well, for at dawn came streams of frigate birds by the thousands from Choiseul headed toward Vella Gulf. Unfortunately we feel we can not risk stopping there. We had better reach Honiara, and learn about our reservations out and the plans of the next cruise—expecially whether we are to take Torben Wolff to Rennel Island. The outcome will have to be divulged in my final report.
