TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 24 
Dr. Rolf L. Bolin

Honolulu represented return to civilization after long days at sea and brief stops at tiny ports and primitive anchorages. Capt. Darr was greeted by his wife, and Drs. Haderlie and Fry were welcomed by their entire families, including a half dozen children, so that it seemed like quite a homecoming. Visits to the University, the Oceanographic Institute at Sea Life Park, the Marine Station on Coconut island, the U. S. Bureau of Commercial Fisheries' Tuna Behavior Facility, the Bishop Museum, the Foster Botanical Garden, etc., were interspersed with normal sight seeing and recreation while the ship was being fumigated, serviced and resupplied. Unfortunately one of the students, Michael Laurs, had to be hospitalized for illness and he was lost to us for the rest of the cruise.

On August 10 we set sail once more for some of the southeastern islands of the group to see what Hawaii had to offer. We anchored off Lahaina on Maui, at an isolated anchorage on Lanai, and off Kailua on the Island of Hawaii for diving, collected some fishes and bottom invertebrates, and did neuston work between anchorages, but we came to the conclusion that regions farther south and west are more interesting and spectacular. Perhaps we have been spoiled by seeing the very best.

One feature that did please us was a cave in a small offshore islet off our anchorage at Lanai. This had an entrance at a depth of 50 feet. As one swam through the portal and along the sandy bottom which sloped gently upward the relative brightness outside was replaced by an eerie gloom. At the far end the roof of the cavern was pierced by numerous small holes through which the bright blue water could be seen. The clear cerulean color, accented by the jet black of the framing rock, appeared like a luminous stained-glass rose window in an ancient Gothic cathedral. The cavern provided us with no biological specimens; in fact, it was too dark in there to see anything clearly, but I believe that everyone who entered experienced a spiritual uplift from the sheer beauty of the unexpected spectacle. It is no wonder that the local divers have named the place "The Cathedral."

Off Hawaii we had our first diving accident, a near drowning. One of the students over-exerted himself in snorkeling and lost consciousness under water. It was only owing to the alertness of Bill Gnewuch who saw the student and immediately towed him to the whaleboat, and to the promptness with which Ben Korgen applied mouth-to-mouth respiration while he was still over the gunwale and not yet fully on board that a tragedy was averted. Everyone on board, and especially the near-victim, is extremely grateful to these two students for the magnificent way in which they reacted without delay to an emergency.

On our return to Honolulu on August 17 for further minor repairs and for topping off the fuel and water tanks for the long reach home, we sampled once more the varied things that a big city has to offer. The final event was a farewell dinner for Sir Alister Hardy at one of the big hotels at Waikiki. Unfortunately, he had to leave us before the end of the cruise in order to attend some important meetings in England, and we lost a valued mentor and a wonderful-shipmate and friend.

On August 21 we sailed for home. Trying to avoid the headwinds of the northeast trades, we heeded almost due north and then made a great arc to the eastward around the center of the semipermanent east-Pacific high. On the way we encountered a sparse population of Velella, the "by-the-wind-sailor." They had the sails extending from N.W. to S.E., differing in this regard from those that we had taken off San Diego on the outward voyage and being exactly the same as those we collected in the Mozambique Channel between Madagascar and Farica, well south of the equator. They shot down my idea that under the influence of Coroli's force those of the two hemispheres might differ in regard to the angle of their sails.

During this leg of the cruise we took neuston hauls when the weather permitted, but we were in the area of a marine desert known as the East Pacific Barrier where plankton populations are notoriously sparse. As a consequence our catches were poor indeed, and sometimes consisted of nothing more than two or three specimens of the marine water-strider, Halobates. It was not until September 4, when we were only a couple of hundred miles off the coast of central California, that indications of richness were such that we again put a plankton net to a depth of about 30 meters at various crustaceans, including innumerable larval forms, large heteropods, lantern fishes, and many other things. The enriching effect of coastal upwelling could hardly have been better illustrated, since we had become used to haul after haul with practically no catch.

Since the field work on this long passage had yielded so little to keep us busy in the laboratory, the lecture^ program was stepped up to two a day. Every morning one of the students spent an hour discussing some subject in marine biology, usually in the field of their own research, and a number of them on investigations pursued during this cruise. The general level of quality was extremely high, and we were all pleased. During the afternoons the two regaining faculty members (Haderlie and Bolin) would hold forth.

Throughout the entire cruise we have been making observations of the birds encountered. These have been largely oceanic types. On September 3 we saw our first gull, which meant that the mainland North America was not too far distant. A check on the chart indicated about 440 miles. The next day a wandering tattler came on board and settled down on top of the laboratory, and later we spotted a phalarope. By the 5th we had seen a warbler, and a song sparrow and a black phoebe had also come on board. About 80 miles out we spotted a butterfly fluttering about. These evidences of the proximity of land was a bit too much, and channel fever spread throughout the entire ship. Periodically people would leave their tasks of cleaning up and packing, and would wander topside and strain their eyes eastward hoping for the first sign of land. At last, just before 6 o'clock the outline of the Monterey Peninsula became faintly visible through the haze. Gradually the details sharpened, only to be obscured again when the sun dipped behind the western clouds and darkness began to fall. However, at the time Pt. Pinos light began to flash and beckon us in. 


Before 8 o'clock TE VEGA was safe in her home port for the first time. She had spent 26 months plowing distant waters; she had tied up in such odd ports as Hellville and Honiara, Mombasa and Mustamudu, Padang and Penang; she had dodged coral reefs at Fakaofo and Fanning Islands, at New Britain and Niuatobutabu, at Vanikoro and Vavau; she had been battered by wind and wave in the Mozambique Channel and the Bay of Bengal, in the South China and the Coral Seas, in the open Pacific and Indian Oceans; she had served as class room, laboratory and home to 84 graduate students and 32 senior scientists who, as they spent 10-week periods delving into the mysteries of the sea first-hand, had used and sometimes abused her to the limit, low she showed the signs of wear and tear. Still showing the aristocratic lines of the proud luxury yacht that she once was, the scuffs and scars of her battles proclaim her to be a hard-working research vessel. All those who have served aboard her will remember her for a long time.
