TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT 8

November 28th and 29th were spent in Padang, where we took on water and fuel as well as a few supplies, and gave those who could find the time an opportunity for an excursion to Bukit Tinggi. This inland town is at an elevation of about 3500 feet, and those who made the trip reported that the two-hour drive to reach it was through beautiful rugged country, lush with tropical jungle interspersed with terraced rice paddies. At Padang we took on board another guest, Sergent Tobing of the Indonesian Navy, as an observer. Lt. E. H. Hanitayasa, Commander of the Naval Station in Padang, wanted him to gain some familiarity with the seldom visited islands in which we were to work. Sergent Tobing proved to be a very personable young man and the best chess player on board.

Pulo Sipora provided good collecting on November 30th and Dec. 1st; one poison station in a shallow, largely sandy area provided more than forty species of fishes, most of them different from the hundred species taken at another station in a deeper-water coral area. Algae and invertebrates were abundant, and the bird situation was satisfactory.

South Pagi Island, where we spent December 3rd, was much the same. Here Dr. Rutzler, Kasijan and I had an interesting little diversion. Dr. Harold Coolidge, of the Pacific Science Board, had asked me to inquire into the status of the pygmy gibbon in the Mentawei Islands. We started out to seek information at a village, but since none could be seen, we decided to learn its location from the occupants of a canoe that was traveling parallel to shore. The Boston Whalers travel pretty fast with only three people in them, and we were closing distance rapidly when the canoe turned toward shore. I figured that there was a landing there, and I maintained speed. It was not until we were within about one hundred yards and the two children in the canoe jumped overboard and headed for shore to disappear in the brush, that I realized that the people were frightened. I cut the motor at once, just as the woman also jumped overboard. Kasijan shouted apologies to her as she was standing waist-deep in water holding onto the canoe. We had encountered shy natives previously, but this was the first time that anyone showed actual fright. At last the woman was calmed down enough to indicate the direction of the village, and we left her to collect her children and continue her journey. We soon found where the village was hidden away, back from the beach, and were guided in to the mouth of a small stream by the signals of two men on shore. The village was tiny, consisting of only a couple of thatched huts, and the men there could not give us much information. They suggested that we talk to the Chief at Kapong Baru and offered to guide us. I suspect that they very much wanted a ride in the Boston Whaler.

We started out down the upper reaches of Veeken's Bay, and if I had known how far it was, I would not have made the trip. It took us about an hour to reach the "port." This was a sheltered sandbeach behind a tiny mangrove islet. The "harbour master" and his family lived in a single thatched hut at the upper beach limit. We were immediately escorted to the main village about half a mile away. The highway consisted of a series of tree trunks and limbs which had been felled and that intersected each other any-which-way. Some of the trunks were a good foot in diameter; some of the smaller branches were less than three inches. The first part of the trail led through the mangrove swamp, the rest through cleared land on which the felled trees lay haphazardly like a giant pile of jackstraws. Sometimes the path was directly on the ground, sometimes it was six feet or more in the air. The natives trod the trail with utmost aplomb and were much amused by the frantic wagging of outstretched arms by which Rutzler and I kept from falling into the mud of the swamp or the uncertain tangle of taro and jagged sticks.

Kapong Baru was also a tiny village. The huts were widely scattered and there may have been more than the five that we saw, but there were not many. The friendly people, with tattooed faces and bodies and with their teeth filed to points, greeted us with much ceremonial handshaking, followed by the placing of the right hand over the heart. We wished that we could have stayed longer, but it was getting late, and after getting the information we desired, we headed back. We were able to unload our pilots into the arms of their waiting families just before it became pitch dark. As soon as we returned to the ship, the anchor was hoisted and we were away for Mega, taking a dredge haul on the way, which, on screening, yielded small molluscs, crustaceans and other animals.

Pulo Mega, at about 4° South Latitude, 101° E. Longitude, was the limit of our work in the Mentawei Islands. We had intended to continue to Engano, but after encountering poor working conditions at Mega and a rather heavy surf, and after reading in the Pilot that Engano was characterized by heavy breakers even in the calmest weather and that there were only two possible landing places even then, we decided to turn northwestward once more to where we knew from experience there were greener pastures. A short night run brought us to Sanding Island on the morning of December 3rd. This proved to be as good as Mega was poor, and for four days we raided the coral reefs for specimens and hunted the island for birds. The invertebrate people wanted a chance to spend more time than usual in one place in order to get a better picture of the total fauna, and this rich area was ideal. I believe that it was on one of the early days at Sanding Island that Dr. Kohn reported that he now had more than a thousand specimens of his cone shells, which he considers to be the most important mollusc, if not the most important animal, in the world. Previously, Dr. Rosewater had been delighted to extend the known western range limit of the giant clam, Tridacna, with specimens that we had to lift on board by means of block and tackle. Dr. Rutzler is always satisfied because almost everywhere he finds more sponges than he can take care of properly. It appears to me that Dr. Colinvaux has more material than anyone else. At least tray after tray is stacked up in piles in the laboratory and often there is an overflow on deck, but woman-wise, she is never satisfied and always wants more and more Halimeda.

As the material piled up on board and the small boats were not in constant use, some of us took the opportunity to do a little sport fishing. Trolling with feathered jigs along the edge of the reef brought in groupers, barracuda, snappers, jacks and tuna. Some were preserved for science, but some, mainly too big for ready preservation, were pounced upon by our Chinese cook for the galley. His glee in getting them was paralleled by our gusto in eating them fresh from the sea. Poisoned fish also increased our collection. A station on the edge of the reef off the small detached islet of Pulo Stupai did not yield a particularly varied collection, but provided a beautiful seascape. The coral edge was particularly rough, with fragile-looking coral shelves extending outward and stone-hard shrubs growing everywhere. Damsel fishes and wrasses, usually the most numerous types, were relatively scarce, but many surgeon fishes, some jet black and others bright blue and yellow, made up for their lack, while bright angel fishes of several different kinds flaunted their yellow, black and white liveries, and vermillion soldier fishes invaded small caverns here and there. Over the lip of the reef myriads of large jacks, groupers and barracudas patrolled, and big parrot fishes nibbled at the coral cliff below us, beyond our reach because we were snorkeling and had left the scuba gear on board. At something less than one hundred feet, the large fishes became dim moving shapes merging into the deep blue background that looked as if it extended downward forever. The feeling of limitless space below, and the idea that it might contain vicious sharks or twelve-foot groupers that could swallow me like a vacuum cleaner sucking in a piece of fluff, gave me an uneasy feeling whenever I stopped to admire the view. I practically always feel the same way when I look down a very steep submarine slope into nothing.

Sunday, December 8th, was a day of calamity. We were approaching known good collecting grounds on Sipora when there was a thump, followed by vibration. The engine was stopped at once and an examination made. The propeller shaft had broken, and water was pouring in through the housing. Pumps were started immediately, a wooden plug was driven into the shaft and wedged to stop the leak, and divers went over the side to assess the damage. The propeller had shifted aft and was resting against the rudder, but they were able to shove it forward again and secure it in place. However, we are now deprived of our engine and entirely dependent on sail in an area of little wind, and what there is, a head wind. As I write, we have been trying to make headway toward Padang for about thirty hours and have made little or none. The wind comes directly down the strait between Sumatra and the Mentawei Islands and by tacking we make some progress; then the wind dies down and we lose all that we have gained to the two to three loot current running directly against us. We are about twenty miles from where we started, but no closer to our destination. We are about to try towing TE VEGA with our own whale boat, but if the current is too strong for us, we may have to turn around and sail to Djakarta.

It is now December 13th, and at last we are tied up to the dock in Padang. The last few days have been nauseating, to say the least. It has been tack to the east and tack to the west, tow with the whale boat in periods of calm and hope that you are not losing ground, make ten miles today and then lose it the next. We have been stuck in the straits between the Sumatran coast and the offshore islands, and this is simply a river flowing southeastward and also serves to channel the wind in the same direction. We did a lot of looking at current and wind charts for the month of December and toyed with the idea of turning around and running for Djakarta instead of Padang. While it would have been easy to get to the southeast end of Sumatra, we would then encounter Sunda Strait with the same problems that we have here: adverse currents, adverse winds, and coral-confined waters. Our breakdown seems to have happened in the worst possible area. Although I may not be able to appreciate fully the difficulties of making westing around Cape Horn, I shall, from now on, be able to lend a sympathetic ear to any yarn of difficulties in the equatorial doldrums. It is astonishing how difficult it can be to push a sailing vessel across the Equator.

At last, after five days of futile sailing and after trying, without any luck, to get a tug out from Padang by radio, we put Ron Jensen, the Third Mate, with Sergent Tobing as interpreter, in a Boston Whaler with an extra outboard motor, lots of gasoline, water, food, foul weather gear, compass, flashlights, etc. and sent them out to see what they could do. They made the more than thirty mile trip in a little over three hours, and by daylight this morning we were under tow. By four o'clock this afternoon we were tied up.

Although crippled, we held open house on Saturday, December 14th. At about eleven in the morning, we were favored by a visit from Governor Rangkkto of West Sumatra, who came with an entourage of about twenty officers. He was a military man who had spent a year at school in Fort Leven-worth, and he spoke excellent English. Intelligent, interested and friendly, he was a most welcome guest. Almost immediately after his departure three busloads of students from the Universitas Andalas descended upon us, shepherded by two lecturers. I explained the general working of the ship and our program, after which they were divided into groups of about fifteen or twenty and shown the vessel by our own students. In the early afternoon, I was driven to the University and delivered a lecture, discussing the need for oceanographic research, the TE VEGA program as part of it, and the favorable position of Indonesia as a potential exploiter of the sea's wealth. I was amazed at the audience. Although this was on Saturday, a normal holiday, and although the sun was shining brightly as it had no business doing during this normally wet season, well over three hundred students gathered to hear what I had to say. After the talk of about forty-five minutes, I was bombarded by a lot of very good questions. It appeared that the students were really interested, and I had a very good time.

We have taken on fuel, water and supplies, and on Monday we expect to be towed out of the harbor and set sail for Colombo. We fee1 confident that we can make it alright by sailing westward for a few hundred miles where we shall find wind conditions more favorable and the currents tending toward the north. However, we may not arrive until well into January, so it is necessary to send those students who have committments home from here. Seven of them and four of the Senior Scientists will leave for Djakarta by ship on Monday, and from there they will proceed by air. Mr. Gill, Miss Williams and I, will be the only scientists left. I wonder when we shall be able to complete a cruise with a full complement on board?

-Bolin
