TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT 11

Long after dark on June 9th I arrived in Mauritius to rejoin TE VEGA after having been tending to shoreside business during her third cruise. I arrived with the hope, although hardly the expectation, that we might sail on the 10th. It was as I should now have expected it to be with ships—delay for the new generator motors to be installed, delay for parts for the refrigeration system to arrive from the United States, delay while attempting to find gremlins in the radar, delay for this and that, a total of two whole weeks of delay. However, it was not without some recompense. As the work progressed, the ship slowly improved and reached a condition not equalled since she left San Diego almost a year ago. Furthermore, the wait permitted contact with ANTON BRUUN, another American vessel working with the International Indian Ocean Expedition, which came into Port Louis during our stay. We were able to renew friendships and exchange ideas and gossip with her personnel. Finally, the delay gave me a chance to see something of the lovely island of Mauritius.

Through lectures that I gave to the Royal Society of Arts and Sciences of Mauritius and to the L.S.U. Alumni Association (Louisiana State University has about thirty graduates on this distant sugar-rich island), I gained a number of new friends who vied with each other to show me around Mauritius. Four or five sight-seeing trips allowed me to get an excellent impression of the entire small island, of the coral-rimmed coast, of the spectacular sheer mountains (one of them with a gigantic balanced rock on top, like a golf ball on a tee), of the rich sugar fields (some of them wrested from old lava flows by piling the boulders into huge pyramids at a prodigious cost of labor), of crowded towns with a bewildering mixture of European, Asiatic and African people and customs, of very British teas in the afternoon and very French dinners in stately homes at night. Best of all was a trip to one of the forest reserves under the guidance of the eminent botanist Dr. R. E. Vaughan, who showed me what Mauritius must have looked like in the days when the dodo was alive, and who helped me collect a dozen native orchids for the University of California Botanical Garden.

At last, on June 25th, we set sail from Port Louis and by next morning the spectacular peaks of Mauritius were no longer to be seen. After a somewhat rough crossing we entered Tamatave, the main port of Madagascar, in the afternoon of Sunday, the 28th. The scientific party had already departed for Nossi Be to work at the IIOE laboratory there, pending our arrival, so we crated and loaded supplies on Monday, and sailed on Tuesday morning. By about noon on Friday we had come in through the beautiful entrance to Hellville, catching a few tunas and mackerels on our trolling line on the way, and dropped anchor off the town with the totally undeserved name. As it turned out, the laboratory was on the other side of a peninsula just east of Hellville and we did not see it on our approach. It took considerable time to locate our people, but in the afternoon the ship moved to an anchorage off the station, and we went ashore to inspect the dugong in a large laboratory tank, the pet lemur, the chameleons and other interesting local animals.
The scientific party had been busy while awaiting our arrival. The immediate vicinity of the laboratory provided a plentiful supply of Periophthalmus sobrinus, the mud-skipper, a small fish that spends most of its time out of water. Agile and fleet as lizards, they are practically uncatchable in the daytime without an inordinate amount of physical exertion, but at night they fall easy prey to humans armed with flashlights. These half terrestrial, half aquatic animals presented many intriguing problems, and Dr. Malcolm Gordon, leader of the group, had led his people in a concentrated attack. They had carefully recorded many behavioral observations and had measured body temperatures in the field, they had studied water loss in the air in sun and shade, had determined the upper lethal temperature, had investigated body-weight changes on transfer from fresh to salt water, studied the blood concentrations in water of different salinities, measured the metabolic rate in and out of water and taken electrocardiograms to determine differences in the heart rates in water and in air. In short, they had been putting Periophthalmus through the physiological wringer, and they plan to do much more with the beast.

The crab, Cartisoma carnifax, another marine animal tending to develop terrestrial habits, also appeared to demand attention and had been getting its share. Dr. Warren Gross and Dr. Robert Lasiewski had been busy subjecting this form to salinity stresses, and had run a series of blood and urine analyses in order to elucidate the mechanisms of osmoregulation.

On Sunday, July 5th, some of us turned our attention to fresh water in an attempt to collect some cichlids. Dr. Trewavas, of the British Museum, had requested specimens of these fishes from Madagascar for anatomical investigations of the relationship between the ear and the swim bladder. Present knowledge indicates that such work would clarify the evolution of the family and perhaps point to the derivation of species in Madagascar from either Indian or African ancestors. In the hope of pushing back this particular segment of the border of the unknown, Paul Rudy, Don Raidt, Kelly Blackburn, Steve Gann and I, armed with a 25-foot seine, dip nets and rotenone, set out in a Land Rover belonging to the Nossi B^ laboratory. We went to the lower reaches of a small stream some three or four miles distant, and found a lovely spot of riffles and pools. In spite of the fact that we were careful not to go into water deeper than the top of our boots, due to the abundance in fresh waters of the area of Schistosoma (a very unpleasant little blood fluke causing a serious disease), we managed to make an interesting collection of eight different species of fishes. Unfortunately there was only one very small cichlid in the lot, and we hope to try our luck again at a later date on the mainland of Madagascar.

A dividend from this expedition consisted of two specimens of a portunid crab which survived the poisoning without any difficulty. These intrigued Drs. Gross and Lasiewski no end. When a physiologist finds an organism of a marine type living in fresh water or terrestrially, he immediately wants to subject it to all sorts of indignities in order to determine what makes it tick in its unusual environment. These two specimens were put through the mill, and the scientists have demanded more of the crabs.
The work continued while a great assortment of gear was moved on board and instruments set up in both the wet and dry labs. Soon the entire complexion of the ship was changed. Centrifuges, osmometers, pH meters, respirometers, a refrigerated aquarium, precision balances, vacuum distillation apparatus, etc. etc. blossomed here, there, and everywhere. A large tank six-by-four-by-four feet in size was assembled and secured on deck, and a pump was installed by means of which we hope to be able to pump water from below the thermocline. This tank is intended to hold Latimeria chalumnae. the famous coelacanth fish that has brought us to this part of the world.

At last, on July 9th, we set sail for the Comoro Islands, and, with the aid of dramamine, managed to survive a rough trip across the Mozambique Channel. People had a hard time staying in their bunks, and they complained that it was the first time they had retired to become fatigued rather than refreshed. A small table in the mess was broken by one of the students being hurled against it, we took considerable water over the decks, a few things managed to come adrift in spite of being lashed down, but no critical instruments were broken and there was surprisingly little seasickness.

By the morning of Saturday, July 11th, we were in the lee of Anjouan Island and soon dropped anchor off the town of Mutsamudu. On going ashore to take care of entrance formalities we were immediately struck by the Arabic character of the town. Crowded, flat-topped, stone houses with steep stairs to the upper floors; crowded streets that were simply narrow alleys impossible for wheeled traffic, veiled women peeping through narrow slits at the strangers, red fezzes and white flowing robes of various types, everything reminded one of the Far East rather than of Africa. On an elevation immediately behind the town was an old ruined fort with crenalated walls and muzzle loading cannon still protruding through some of the ports. Still higher were the scattered homes of the important Europeans, most of them with commanding views of the sea.

After entry, the first order of the day was to meet with the French officials and the local fishermen in order to arrange for the purchase of a coelacanth, if one could be caught. In spite of Dr. Gordon's impassioned arguments in fluent French, he could win no reduction in the officially established price, and we are now committed to pay 50,000 Comoran francs for a dead coelacanth and 100,000 for a live one (about $200 or $400 U.S.). This may seem a steep price to pay for one fish regardless of size (we would prefer small ones), but considering the rarity of the species and the extraordinary interest throughout the world in this living fossil from the Mesozoic, it would be well worth it to gain some knowledge of its physiology, which is totally unknown at present.

Of course we have not been content to depend entirely on the native fishermen, although they include a man known as Zema who has already caught four coelacanths and should therefore know the technique. We have been busy with set long lines, with hand lines and with free deep-water fish traps, which, after a period of several hours on the bottom, are released by the solution of a magnesium link and float to the surface to be retrieved there. These links have taken much longer to dissolve than they were supposed to, and we have had some anxious hours during which we thought that we had lost our gear. However, they eventually popped up about a day late, and we still have our original four. As with any new operation with unfamiliar gear, we have had our troubles, torn the traps, and made water hauls, but we have modified the gear and the technique of setting it, and we hope that our future catches will yield more significant results than the one magnificent vermillion shrimp from 1300 meters depth that represents our total catch so far.

While waiting for coelacanths to bite on our hooks or get into our traps, we have worked with more familiar gear; we have made some bathythermocasts occupied two hydrographic stations, and made a number of hauls with the Tucker trawl for organisms of the deep scattering layer. From these hauls a great many interesting forms have come on board, among them the rare "barrel-eye" fish (Opisthoproctus): the largest hatchet fish (Argyropelecus) that I have ever seen; large and perfect viper fish (Chauliodus) with dentition that would be the envy of a saber-toothed tiger; numerous representatives of genera (Idiacanthus, Malcosteus. Bathophillus. Astronesthes. Gonostoma. etc.) in related families that are much rarer and scarcely less spectacular with their fearsome teeth, black color, chin barbles, and rows of light organs; big, transparent, ribbon-like, leptocephalus larvae of unknown eels; many bright red shrimps (Acanthephyra and related forms); an amphipod (Cystosoma) with a body as large as a golf ball and so crystal clear that it is absolutely invisible in water; large pelagic colonial tunicates (Prosoma) that, when stimulated with the finger, glowed with a bright cold light to justify their name, which means "fire body"; violet-brown jelly fish (Atolla) from the cold dark depths; big heteropods (Carinaria), pelagic snails with ridiculously small shells that swim with slow ungainly flapping motions and are so transparent that their eyes appear to be two detached black blobs. The roll call of fantastic, grotesque or beautiful forms is practically endless; we are getting a good impression of a world that most people scarcely know exists.

Some of these specimens that came up in fair condition have been placed in a refrigerated aquarium and are surviving surprisingly well. They are unique material for physiological experimentation. At present Dr. Inga Boetius is measuring the respiratory rate of crustaceans from the deep scattering layer—probably the first time that such an investigation has been attempted. Others are sacrificed for biochemical work. Dr. Malcolm Gordon and Dr. Jan Boetius have been processing muscle tissue from various deep-sea fishes for the determination of amino acids. The greater part of the catches are preserved for taxonomic and anatomical work by various specialists in shore laboratories at a later date.

The bottom falls off very steeply around this volcanic island and does not present ideal trawling ground. Even at 1300 meters the fathometer indicated about a twelve degree slope outward, but when we cruised parallel to shore the depth held even and there were no marked irregularities on the trace. We decided that it was worthwhile to try for a haul of deep bottom animals, so over went the beam trawl. Everything seemed to work fine until we got the line almost vertical in hauling in, and then the winch would simply not pull the trawl in. We were anchored. There was only one thing to do; we tried to break the gear loose by going slow ahead. Something gave alright, but it was not the obstruction on the bottom. When the end of the wire came in we found that we had snapped both of the wire cables of the net, and the trawl remained about three-quarters of a mile beneath the surface. In slight recompense for our loss, the fish traps set at the same depth have brought us a rare deep-sea shark (Euprotomicrus), a couple of conger eels, a number of large red prawns (some for science and some for food--and very good, too!), and a few small amphipods clinging to the remains of the bait.

Not all of our work has been in deep water. On Sunday, July 19th, we tried our luck on a fish-poisoning station on a reef close to shore. A vertical coral wall descended from about seven to twenty feet and was cut by a series of sharp little canyons. These provided good spots to spread the rotenone. The reef was not particularly rich, the water was rather murky with visibility limited to about twenty feet, but we were fairly successful, and everyone, particularly those to whom coral reefs were new and strange, enjoyed the adventure. We preserved a representative collection of colorful reef fishes, and Lorraine Morin, a lovely young student who is enamored of helminth parasites, had a wonderful chance to indulge in the pastime of pawing through fish anatomy for tape worms, flukes and such ilk. Strangely enough, she seemed to take a great delight in doing it. Such devotion to science should be encouraged and we shall have to see to it that she gets all the material that she wants.

On the evening of Monday, July 21st, we were excited to hear that a coelacanth had been caught at a town on the east coast about an hour away by car. One of the local entrepreneurs, who are always ready to arrange anything for a slight fee, took us to see the fisherman who had caught it and who just happened to be in town. After much flow of the Comoran version of Arabic, and its translation into French, we learned that the fish had been caught four days previously, that it was a bit longer than the man’s arm, that it had been packed away in salt, that the body cavity had been opened and the internal organs preserved as well. It was not just what we wanted, but we thought that it should be looked at in any case with the possibility of purchase in mind. Accordingly it was agreed that we would pay for the transportation of the fish and the fisherman to Mutsamudu where we could see the specimen on the pier at 7:30 in the morning and decide what to do.

At the appointed time most of the scientific party, equipped with cameras, were on the pier, but there was no fish to be seen. We walked into the adjacent town square, and after a while our entrepreneur appeared to open his tiny shop. After waiting for some time for the fisherman, our helpful friend informed us that the fisherman would come to his home, so we all set out on a parade through ever-narrowing alleys which soon required us to walk in single file. At last we reached our guide's home and he talked to someone inside whom we did not see. Then we turned around and marched back and he talked to several people here and there, and finally, on the steps of the mosque he said that the fisherman had gone to the hospital. In desperation we got a "taxi," a truck with board seats on each side, and went to the hospital to find our man. They had never heard of him. What happened we still do not know for sure, but we rather suspect that we have been given a Comoran run-around. Anyhow we returned to the ship and got to work once more.
We have been working very hard on this cruise, but there has been a chance to crowd in a few extracurricular activities. The day after our arrival was some sort of a local holiday, and that evening some of the ship's company went to a "bull fight," which was evidently not of the Spanish variety, but consisted of anyone who desired to do so worrying a distracted heifer at the risk of being knocked down. It provided a chance for mingling with the town folk. On Bastille Day, Dr. Gordon and I were invited to a,"Sirop" given by the Mayor at the Palace of the Sultan. We figured it would be a dry Moslem affair, but there was a Moslem table with soft drinks and a European table with whisky and champagne. There were interesting pastries and tidbits for everybody. The palace was not an imposing building, but a bare and weather-worn block; the sultan was not present since he died some time in the thirties, but several of his relatives, resplendent in burnooses and full Arabian regalia, were there to enliven the party. It was a pleasant and interesting affair. One evening we all went to see an excellent under-water movie, the work of a French photographer who has been working in this area for some months. A number of people from the ship have been invited to dinner or for excursions on shore, and we have had numerous visitors on board. Everything is progressing normally.

-Bolin
