TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE INSTALLMENT 13

On August 15th we reached Mayotte, the easternmost island of the Comoro group. This is almost entirely surrounded by a barrier reef and, from its appearance on the chart and from verbal reports, promised to provide spectacular coral 0ardens and excellent fish-collecting sites.

As we approached, the wind, which had deserted us during the crossing, sprang up fresh and strong just when we did not welcome it. By mid-morning, we were off the northern end of the island, where the western limit of a long line of breakers indicated the position of the narrow entrance of the Passe M'Zambourou. Once inside the reef, the chart showed a maze of coral heads and shallow patches, but buoys and ran 0e markers made the channel easy to follow. A little before lunch time we were safely at anchor in the Baie de Langoni, but by then the wind was heavy and kicking up a nasty whitecapped chop within a couple of hundred yards of the lee shore. A little scouting with a glass-bottomed box from one of the Boston whalers showed nice development of coral on the fringing reef, but the water was murky and the waves and strong current made conditions unsuitable for work. Attack on the outer barrier reef about five miles off shore was out of the question because of the heavy breakers. The time remaining for our second attempt to catch a coelacanth was running short, and we could ill afford to wait for conditions to improve. Consequently, with considerable re3ret we gave up the Mayotte venture that we had all looked forward to as an interesting break in our routine program, and early that same afternoon we left again without having set foot on the island.

By one o'clock in the morning of Sunday, August 15th, we were once more in our old stamping ground off the northern coast of Anjouan, with the Tucker trawl over for the first of two hauls. The catches were as expected, and by the time we dropped anchor off Mutsamudu in the predawn darkness, the respiration of deep-water shrimps was under investigation and samples of Chauliodus muscle were being prepared for biochemical analysis. Just after breakfast the deep-water traps were prepared and set, and the routine established on our earlier visit was under way.

Although we are only about twelve degrees from the equator, there is an appreciable seasonal temperature change. With the approach of the southern hemisphere spring, the temperature is appreciably warmer than when we left, and the saloon tends to become unbearably hot during the evening seminars. As an experiment we decided to try holding the meetings on the after deck. A piece of plywood made an acceptable substitute for the blackboard. A spotlight was rigged so that it was visible to all, and the speaker could refer to his notes without difficulty. In spite of the interference of rigging and the difficulty of finding a good place for everyone to sit down, it was much more comfortable than the saloon. The little brightly illuminated academic patch in the velvety blackness of the tropical night, with gentle sea breezes providing satisfactory air conditioning, was appreciated by all concerned. It was literally a case of "no sweat" and it will probably be continued whenever weather and sea conditions permit.

We have modified our previous procedure somewhat. Instead of trawling during the daytime we have been trying it at night when the organisms of the deep scattering layer have migrated closer to the surface. The ship has therefore been riding at anchor during the daylight hours, which makes most of the laboratory work more comfortable and provides an opportunity for shore excursions or for different activities on board.

Sometimes the water at our anchorage is greenish and murky. At other times it is the clear deep blue that one associates with the open ocean far from shore, and then, unless the surface is broken by waves, one can spot a succession of small, almost invisible wraiths drifting past in the upper layers--equally spaced brownish spheres in long rows that turn out to be the stomachs of the otherwise invisible pelagic tunicate Cyclosalpa, linked together in brotherly chains; slight hints of pulsing movements in the water itself that betoken small medusae (Aequoria, Liriope, etc., or their close relatives); flashes of irridescence that can only be the cilliary bands of ctenophores; vague impressions of something unknown that demand investigation.

We have dipnetted a number of these and brought in a succession of weird and marvelous animals, most of them too fragile for preservation. The siphonophore Diphyes (or possibly Galeolaria) is a small jet-propelled double torpedo of glass trailing a long whip-like tail which, when the animal ceases its pulsing spurts, expands into a beautiful diaphanous plume made up of hundreds of astonishingly elongating tentacles from the feeding individuals of the colony. The ctenophore Cestum veneris, commonly known as Venus' girdle, has the form of a narrow ribbon-like band, visible only because the yellow or reddish gut extends as a transverse streak across the middle of the ribbon and the ciliated bands trace rose-colored irridescent double lines around the margin of the body. The largest one we caught was almost three feet in length; the smaller ones, less than a foot long, hardly merit the term girdle and they have become known on board as "Venus' garter-belts." They are all surprisingly active, swimming by serpentine movements of the entire body, rather than by ciliary action. We have also taken numbers of the sack-like ctenophores Beroe cucumis and B. forskalii and watched them swim with their mouths wide open, apparently hunting for prey. The latter species is one of the most brightly luminescent of all marine organisms,
and we kept a number in plastic pans until nightfall in order to observe this phenomenon. On agitation they put on a gorgeous display, with flashes and waves of brilliant green fire lighting up the entire containers and illuminating the faces of the observers.

From the very surface we dipped small Portuguese men-of-war (Physalia) and, placing them in trays of sea water, were able to observe the occasional slow rolling to right or left by means of which these animals manage to keep their floatation bladders moist, even on calm days under a tropical sun. Many of us, while snorkeling during the last few days, have had the unenviable experience of testing the potency of the stinging cells in the dark blue tentacles of these beautiful nuisances and have learned to respect them. We have also taken several specimens of the pelagic hydroid Porpita, a flat circular disk with a dense circlet of radiating tentacles. Floating on the surface this form looks for all the world like an elaborate stylized diagram of the sun done in blue ink. All of these marvelous pelagic organisms, variously transparent, blue or luminescent came on board two days following our seminar on pelagic adaptation and the day after our discussion of coloration and bioluminescence. There could have been no more graphic illustration of a number of points made in the lectures.

The next day a number of new forms were added to our riches--blue by-the-wind sailors (Velella); blue pelagic snails (Janthina), with reversed countershading, hanging upside down from their frothy bubble-rafts; pale bluish-white gooseneck barnacles (Lepas) suspended from the snail shells; and finally the lovely light and dark blue nudibranch Glaucus, a real gem of feathery design. We now had an adequate sample of a complex surface community similar to the one that had engaged the attention of staff and students off the California coast, half a world away, on the first cruise of TE VEGA. We have noted an interesting fact concerning Velella. When oriented with the long axis pointing toward the north all of the specimens collected more than a year ago off America had the sail extending from NW to SE; all of the individuals collected here have it extending from NE to SW. Is this simply due to wind-sorting of randomly varying individuals or could it possibly be that in some obscure way Coriolis force may have differentiated the populations of the northern and southern hemispheres? We rather doubt the latter possibility, but we shall continue to note the orientation of the sails in whatever geographical area we encounter these animals.

On the last day of our stay at Anjouan, while waiting for the deep-water traps to surface, we made a final fish collection. Scouting on previous days had revealed the presence of a room-like pit in the fringing reef near our anchorage. Its dimensions were roughly thirty by thirty feet, and it was also about thirty feet deep with vertical walls of coral rising to within two or three feet of the surface. Three narrow corridors led into the chamber, which had a flat sand floor. Although the fish population seemed to be rather meager, it was an ideally protected situation in which the rotenone would not be dissipated too quickly, so we decided to give it a try.

Dr. Lasiewski and I donned SCUBA gear and, each armed with a plastic bottle of Noxfish, we were soon shooting dense brownish-grey smoke rings into the water. He first paid attention to the exits, cutting them off with curtains of rotenone, and then squirted the main chamber until it was so cloudy that visibility was cut down to about six feet. As soon as we returned our bottles to the whaleboat and exchanged them for short-handled dipnets we were joined by three other divers and a couple of snorkelers. We kept at the task of collecting until we ran out of air in our tanks and fishes from adjacent areas were moving in to compete with us for our catch. From the surface, the midwater and the bottom we scooped up bright crimson soldier fishes and black or gaudily striped surgeon fishes with scimitars on their caudal peduncles to make us beware, curious dragonettes and depressed flatheads, colorful butterfly fishes and long slender worm eels, beautiful but venomous lion fishes and long-snouted wrasses, bearded goat fishes and electric rays, viciously toothed lizard fishes and grotesque bulbous anglers. The prize was a one-and-a-half inch Solenostomus that Larry Oglesby almost passed up as a small piece of drifting seaweed until he noticed that it had an eye--a most unusual alga, or, for that matter, a most unusual fish! We filled our containers to overflowing, and when, some days later, the collection was preserved, sorted and packed for shipment home, we discovered that the apparently meager fish fauna of the small habitat sampled had yielded well over one hundred species belonging to more than thirty families.

On Saturday, August 22nd, we hoisted the anchor and headed NNW for Mombasa. The trip was uneventful and toward noon on Tuesday, the 25th, we began to encounter traffic and the low hills of the African coast loomed out of the haze. As we proceeded up the harbor under the guidance of the pilot everyone was impressed by the evidences of civilization. We had become accustomed during the last couple of months to considering Hellville and Mutsamudu to be typical communities in this part of the world, and probably we all presumed that Mombasa would be a somewhat larger replica. To our surprise, instead of a squalid and decaying town we found Mombasa to be a modern city of one hundred eighty thousand with good stores, hotels, and facilities of all kinds, populated by an alert and business-like citizenry. Aside from mass-produced primitive wood carvings, lion-claw cuff-links, zebra-hide handbags and similar items beckoning the tourist's dollars from shop windows, there was little evidence at first that we had invaded darkest Africa. However, exploration away from the center of the city soon revealed native African sections with wattled huts and an Arabian quarter--ample evidence that we are not in America.

Plans for sight-seeing expeditions in this interesting country, for visits to the convenient game reserves, for climbing Kilamanjaro, for stopping at various places in Europe or Asia on the way back to the United States, or simply for a quick and direct flight home, were soon under way. By Wednesday evening the first two students had departed and the cruise was considered over.

In retrospect, this has been the best cruise so far. Our program was not hampered nor curtailed by serious mechanical troubles. We did not catch the coelacanth that we were after, but we were content to investigate other interesting organisms instead. An excellent and cooperative group of senior scientists and students worked together effectively, learned much about the sea and its inhabitants, accomplished a great deal of worthwhile physiological research, saw strange places, met new and interesting people, and had a busy, stimulating and good time. It is the first cruise with which I am fully satisfied, and it indicates that our fumbling period of trial and error is over. We should have smooth sailing from now on.

-Bolin
