TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 18 
Dr. Rolf L. Bolin 

Honiara provided a break for shore-side relaxation while new electrical elements were installed to bring the winches into operation, and fuel, water and food supplies were replenished. Dr. Richard Thompson, of the British Solomon Islands Geological Survey, invited the group to visit his institution, where he gave a most interesting talk on the flourishing research program and led the party on an inspection of the various laboratories. He also provided a land rover to take the students to the limit of the road on the western end of Guadalcanal, which enabled them to see something of the country and the native population.

As usual, individuals or small groups of the ship's company sampled the hospitality of various local citizens, usually people with scientific interests who were able to contribute to our ever-growing fund of knowledge. For example, the faculty, enjoyed an excellent dinner at the home of Mr. Geoffrey Dennis, a government forester and superb naturalist, inspected his tropical garden which was of great botanical interest, and learned much of the biology and history of the Solomon Islands. Dr. Frost, catering to his medical interests, visited the leprosarium. This is operated by three nuns, two of whom had been here prior to World War II. From them he got a fascinating first-hand story of the Japanese invasion, their flight and life among the natives in the bush, and their subsequent rescue from the southern shore by a U. S. naval vessel.

On Sunday morning we put out and headed eastward up Iron Bottom Bay. Since the water was relatively shallow we decided not to attempt any hydrographic or plankton work, and we did not care to risk our beam trawls or dredges among the many sunken ships littering the bottom. Instead we spent the time on a lively seminar on ocean bottoms and sediments with all of the faculty and a number of the students contributing. When we finally did reach deep water we also encountered wind—strong head winds. These not only kicked up a heavy sea in which I did not care to introduce the students to the handling of heavy equipment or delicate instruments over the side, but they reduced the speed of the ship drastically and brought on a plague of upset stomachs that made any kind of work almost impossible. Even that redoubtable Dane, Torben Wolff, who has sailed around the world from the North Sea to the subantarctic and has led his own expedition in these same waters, was sick. With field work out of the question we occupied our time with two seminars a day (almost everyone attending) and with reading, while waiting for conditions to improve.

It was not until the wee dark hours of April 15, a day-and-a-half behind schedule, that we arrived in Vanikoro in the Santa Cruz Islands, or the Eastern Solomons, as they are sometimes called. We cruised back and forth waiting for the sun to climb high enough so that a man on the spreaders could see beneath the surface and guide us through the tricky entrance into the lagoon and to safe anchorage off the tiny village of Peu, where we unloaded medical supplies provided by the hospital in Honiara.

In the afternoon we all went to take a reconnaissance of the extremely rich barrier reef about a mile-and-a-half from shore. It was much more spectacular than any that we had previously encountered, with forests of stag-horn coral showing blue tips at the ends of the brown branches, small tightly branched heads of rose pink, compact types with luminous green polyps, thin jutting shelves of pearl grey, corals so dense and hard that we could not break them loose with a wrecking bar, and corals so delicate and brittle that they could be plucked more easily than flowers. Although seemingly totally unsuited for life in this region of surf and strong currents, these latter types flourished as small fantastic shrubs of unbelievable colors. Embedded in the dense coral, and impossible to remove, were large Tridacna clams displaying brilliant green or blue mantles until they closed at the passing of a shadow. Tube worms of several different species showed single or twin rosettes of banded feathery tentacles that vanished in an instant when touched. Snails of various types crawled here and there, starfishes, brittle stars and sea urchins could be found for the hunting, grey or black sea cucumbers occupied protected niches, crinoids, jet black or black with green bands clung to the coral and yielded symbiotic crabs, shrimps and brittle stars colored exactly like the host. Over and through the coral swam swarms of colorful fishes. Neon-blue damsel fishes cavorted in clouds in the free water above the reef while larger yellowish-brown members of the same family sought refuge in the coral thickets and defended their territories against others of their kind. They even made half-hearted attempts to scare us off. Orange red clown fishes with pearly white bands nestled among the tentacles of large anemones. Black surgeon fishes, with bright red blotches around their wicked knife-like spines, picked at the minute algae growing on the coral, while green, blue and red parrot fishes bit off chunks of the coral itself. Blue and white wrasses chased madly around picking parasites from all of the other fishes. It is a riot of color and action that amazed those who had seen nothing comparable before.

After returning to the ship and taking care of our collections and gear, we climbed back into the Boston whalers and went up the small Lawrence River for about half-a-mile. Here, in a beautiful setting, with tall trees meeting overhead, we went swimming in cool fresh water and washed our clothes—an important measure for conservation of the ship's water supply. The river banks, with tree ferns, flowering red ginger, towering philodendrons, colorful begonia leaves, and the moss-covered trees dripping with epiphytic ferns and orchids, made it a pleasant duty to so conserve water at this lovely spot every evening during our stay.

That night some of us went out armed with flashlights to hung Periopthalmus in a small tidal creek. We took a few of these strange mud-skipper fishes, and also came back with several species of crabs and a toad, the latter a strange companion for crabs, indeed.

On April 16 we hit the coral reef again with a concerted attack. Everyone was assigned a particular plant or animal group to concentrate on, and was given the responsibility of reporting on it later. Backed by the knowledge gained on the previous day, our multipronged attack was very successful.
The next day's efforts were divided between two parties. One ran a poison station on the barren coral rock and mud of the shoreline and took several gobies, flatfishes, parapercids, goatfishes, mullets, etc., not previously collected. The other group worked the barrier reef once more. On this field trip they took along a native who showed them the location of the two sunken ships, "Boussole" and "Astrolabe," that marked the tragic end of Laparouse's ill-fated expedition in 1788. In addition to biological specimens, they were able to collect a few rusty pieces of iron from the ship as souveniers.

As soon as the sun was high enough on the 18th for a man on the spreaders to see submerged coral heads we set sail for Tikopia. We arrived before daylight next morning in a driving tropical downpour that obscured the island and made it impossible for us to approach the anchorage. Brief moments of visibility were soon cut short by new torrents of water from the sky, and it was not until early afternoon that we were finally able to drop the hook.

Tikopia is the peak of a volcano that just penetrates the ocean surface to form an island, about two by three miles in extent, which reaches an extreme elevation of about 1200 feet. The ancient crater holds a beautiful lake, almost surrounded by a horseshoe-shaped rim of small but steep heavily wooded mountains. However, to the south the lake is separated from the sea only by a sand bar. During the height of the wet season the natives dig a drainage canal through this bar and set nets to collect fish going out through the overflow. We were able to purchase specimens of most of the fishes found in the lake, and we took several bathythermograph casts in it to a maximum depth of 232 feet. The cooler fresh water of the surface rests on a deeper layer of warm salt water.

The surf was so heavy at Tikopia that any work on the outer portions of the fringing reef was out of the question. Even on its inner parts it was as much as a swimmer with swim fins could do to stay in one position. As a result we had to limit our work to running a poison station in the very shallow water immediately along shore where the bottom appeared to be made up of barren sand, and even here the current was too strong for our liking. However, we dribbled a little fish poison in, and as it drifted away repeated the process. With the enthusiastic help of about 100 laughing, shouting natives we managed to get a fair catch, echelid and ophichthyid eels being prominent in the collection.

Tikopia has been less influenced by white man and his civilization than have most Pacific Islands, since it is a Protected Territory which few vessels are permitted to visit. However, the culture of this tiny speck is rapidly changing. Its Polynesian people are good workers, and most of the families have at one time or another been transported to larger islands for a period of labor on plantations, so that now only about a third of the population has not had direct and prolonged contact with more sophisticated societies. It is a place where both sexes go around bare to the waist, where young children romp through the villages stark naked, where a few people still wear loincloths made of tapa (the bark of the mulberry tree), but where umbrellas are common! It is a place where intricate tribal tattoos adorn not only the body and limbs, but the face as well, where spears, bows and arrows, and carved ceremonial staffs are much in evidence, where bettle-nut chewing has turned teeth black and lips blood red, but where a native pedals his foot-powered generator to contact Honiara on the radio! It is a place where pierced ear lobes are stretched out of shape by the weight of various ornaments ranging from flowers to heavy shells, where many men wear the tooth of grandfather on a string around the neck as a mark of respect, where many women wear a crown or circlet of a departed relative's hair as a memorial, but where almost all people speak acceptable English and everyone belongs to the Church of England! We found them to be friendly, hospitable, jolley and altogether delightful. We should have liked to stay among them much longer.

Our major purpose in visiting the island was to collect blood samples from the native population for a study of malaria that is in progress at the School of Tropical Medicine of the University of Sydney. Consequently, after presenting a large box of medical supplies from the Honiara Hospital as token of our medical connections, making gifts of a goodly number of fishhooks to each of the four Chiefs and spreading around a fair quantity of cigarettes to establish good will, Dr. Frost set up shop in a dark, thatched native hut and prepared for the blood letting. The first volunteer was the son of the Number 2 Chief, a very intelligent young man. After he had set a good example it was not too difficult to keep a stream of people coming, particularly when the Chief or one of the village elders issued harsh commands to reluctant individuals. The main difficulty was the poor light, largely obscured by the curious crowd that insisted on peering through the single window in front of which the work was being done. Next morning the work was resumed in another village under better conditions, for with the cessation of rain it could be done outdoors, and the Number 1 Chief provided a man to fan the flies away Dr. Frost managed to get smears from 132 individuals of both sexes ranging in age from about 7 to 85. Since this represents well over 10% of the total population we feel that we got a really good representative sample and that Dr. Black in Sydney should be happy.

Late on the afternoon of April 20 we reluctantly left this charming little Eden and set out for Suva. It was the same story all over again; strong winds and heavy seas prevailed, and working conditions were anything but favorable. Our activities were once more limited to two seminars a day and reading, interspaced with occasional plankton tows and examination of the catch by those whose stomachs would tolerate peering through a microscope while the ship rolled and pitched.
