TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE--INSTALLMENT 9

On Monday, December 16th, we saw our departing members sail for Djakarta, but we, ourselves, did not get away. The Captain spent the entire day dickering with the captain of a freighter going northwest for a tow to the northern end of Sumatra, where we could expect the steady northeast monsoon. With the help of our agent, the price was slowly worked down from a ridiculously high figure to a fairly reasonable price. However, before a firm bargain could be struck, the freighter's chief engineer demanded a personal cut, and then the other members of the crew began to put in claims for additional cumshaw so that the price climbed beyond all reason once more. We finally quit dickering in disgust.

Meanwhile, as news of our presence in the harbor spread, local interest seemed to increase, and we played host to another large group from the University.

Finally, at 0800 on Tuesday, the harbor tug towed us out into the strait and dropped the lines at noon. We were on our own, eighteen miles from Padang and almost fourteen hundred miles from Colombo. The first twenty-four hours we made sixty miles, not quite in the right direction, but close to what we figured we would do in distance. According to the wind charts for December, one can expect calms and light variable airs about nine per cent of the time in this area; we have had them about seventy per cent of the time. It took us more than three days to clear the islands and to get into open water with plenty of room to maneuver in any direction, and even then we didn't progress appreciably better. Disappointing daily mileages piled up, 26 miles, 22, 76, 62, 47, 45, 28; Colombo is still a long way off!

Christmas came, and in spite of rolling sluggishly in the long oily swell of a mirror-like sea, we celebrated. Christmas greetings were passed throughout the ship, and messages from home were read. The saloon was decorated with Christmas ornaments, colored paper streamers, and balloons. "Snow" blanketed the colder regions of the world map that is our blackboard and frosted the portholes, while the cook prepared a tremendous dinner with turkey, ham and steaks. Cakes, nuts and candies were displayed for the taking, and an anonymous "poem" was pinned on the bulletin board:

CHRISTMAS ON TE VEGA, 1963

'Twas the night before Christmas 
And all through the ship 
Not a creature was stirring, 
Not even a blip.

The sails were raised
On the masts with great care 
In hopes that St. Nicholas
Would fill than with air.


I in my oilskins
The mate in his hat 
Stood back at the wheel 
A-chewin' the fat.

Down in the galley
Voices raised in a shout. 
The eight-to-twelve watch 
Was a-pourin' the stout.

Out on the horizon
There rose such a clatter 
I sprang to the rail
To see what was the matter.

I threw back my hat 
And raised up my glass,
Saw a sleigh and 8 reindeer 
Make a galloping pass.

They lit on the masthead 
So dainty and light, 
To my old sea-dog eyes 
'Twas a glorious sight.

A figure with sea bag 
Stepped out from the sleigh 
And looked at the deck 
Several fathoms away.

He slid down the halyard 
So fast and so quick
I knew by his lines 
It must be St. Nick.

With a fancy red jumper 
And bell bottoms to match, 
He sprang to the foc'sle 
And slid back the hatch.

He looked all around
And then went below
His sea bag to empty,
His gifts to bestow.

Along through the passage 
Without glancing back,
A new tops'le jib
For a mate who’s called Jack.

For our jolly chief scientist 
At his feet would he lay
A flapping old coelacanth
To brighten his day.


He flew up the ratlines, Jumped into his sleigh,
North by northwest
Was the course that he lay.

And he shouted to the crew 
As he cast off a bight, 
MERRY CHRISTMAS TO ALL, AND TO ALL, A GOOD NIGHT!

Day after day, we had light variable breaths of air and averaged less than fifty miles for twenty-four hours. December 28th was the worst, with only thirteen miles logged. Then came a couple of days when we did better than seventy, and the contrast was such that everybody talked about having found the monsoon at last. It really wasn't, but we got stronger bursts of wind in the squalls, and in one of them the mainsail split, giving us a two-day sewing job to get it fixed. In spite of everything, spirits kept bright enough so that the entry in log for the first watch of the new year appeared in the traditional verse, as follows:

By the old Mentawei Island, 
Lying off Sumatra's coast, 
We were cruising gayly northward 
Like a diesel-perfumed ghost,

When there came an awful thumpin' 
And we stopped the engine quick; 
The propeller shaft was busted, 
And the Chief was feelin' sick.

But we couldn't make no northing 
Cause the winds would all blow wrong 
And when the damn things didn't blow 
The current south was strong

Well, we hoisted all the stout sails 
Like a schooner's s'posed to do, 
And we tacked to East and tacked to 
And cussed at all the crew. West,

Five days we tried, and had no luck;
The sails would slap and bang.
At last we got a filthy tug
To tow us to Padang.

Here we discharged our scientists 
And took on fresh supplies;
And bargained for a tow up North, 
And cursed the dripping skies.'

At last the tug hooked on once more
And towed us out to sea,
Where we set sail for Ceylon, fair, 
As happy as could be.

Oh fools we were! We did not know 
How dole could doldrums be!
We tacked and drifted night and day 
And made not a degree.

Our daily runs were pitiful,
A score of miles, or ten,
As we sailed circles 'round the squalls 
And drifted back again.

Ten days we tried to go to North, 
Northwest, or even West;
The wind blew wrong, or just died out, 
It was an awful pest!

At last we neared Sumatra's tip,
And caught the bless'd monsoon; 
The sails filled out, we streaked along 
Beneath the tropic moon.

But then the blasted mainsail split 
With the awful crack of doom, 
And here we sit and sew her up 
As our hearts are filled with gloom.

The moon tonight is full and bright,
The weather calm and clear.
A very pleasant night for us 
To ring in the New Year.

The heavy swells of yesterday, 
Thank God, are getting less, 
But alas! The winds that brought 
Have gone, I must confess them

The shipping lanes from East to West
On yonder skyline be;
The lights of westbound merchantmen
Go past us speedily.

The headsails and the fisherman
Are pulling us along 
To West Northwest at full two knots, 
And so I end my song.

At last, on January 5th we finally did hit the monsoon, and then our daily log read 142, 230, and 180 miles for consecutive daily runs, to bring us to Dondra Head, the southernmost tip of Ceylon. It was wonderful while it lasted, but the wind has died again, probably because we are now in the lee of the land. Now we are slowly creeping along the coast with the lights of Ceylon strung along in a line to starboard and a lot of traffic around us. Colombo is less than a hundred miles away and it looks as if we will make it, possibly tomorrow if the wind picks up; if not, surely the next day.

Of course it was impossible for us to end a cruise in a nice quiet and reasonable fashion. It was like trying to get into Padang all over again. Day after day, we tacked to west and to east and in the intermittent periods of dead calm drifted back south. For a couple of days, we made a few miles--a very few. Then, on the evening of the 10th, we found ourselves within twenty miles of our noon position on the 7th. We decided that we would give the wind another twenty-four hours to show itself and to call a tug if it did not cooperate. At just about noon on the 11th, a light breeze sprang up and we began to move slowly through the water. Stronger and stronger it became, howling down from west-northwest, and we were in for a wild night of tacking back and forth with the lee rail under on either tack, of cleaning up things that broke their securings, of fighting for a foothold on the steeply canted decks or trying to keep from being thrown out of our bunks. At 0600 on the 12th, we were creeping into Colombo harbour under a dying wind that finally gave up the ghost and made it necessary for us to drop the hook just off the end of the breakwater. Aside from a bit of water here and there, and having the paint locker hatch, combing and all, torn away by a boarding sea, we seem to have suffered no damage. At the same time, I have gained new respect for sailors. The sight of the first mate, Jack Thomsen, and two sailors, George Colyer and Tom Kantrud, aloft at the height of the blow, furling and securing the main topsail, was too much for me. I had to go below, but they took it all as part of the day's work.

After a while a tug came out and hooked a cable to us, but before we could get started they had fouled our anchor chain in their propeller! If anything can happen to a ship, I have concluded, it will happen to TE VEGA. Anyhow, another tug was sent for and soon we were securely tied up to the wharf.
