TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS 
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 2

August 5. Hawaii was a very successful stop. After patrolling back and forth outside the harbor entrance waiting for permission to come in, we tied up at Pier 9, just below the Aloha Tower, at 1800 hours on Monday, July 29th. (I made a mistake in the date of my last entry.) The ship was all in order and ready for inspection by expected visitors, and as we secured, Capt. Olsen's wife and daughter and their friends, the Allens, and Norman McLean, husband of one of the students, stepped on board with frangipani leis for the entire ship's company.

The students were given their freedom until 0900 Wednesday in order to provide adequate time for the staff to arrange the local schedule. On Tuesday morning; Dr. Taivo Laevastu drove the faculty to the University for a conference and lunch with Dr. R. W. Hiatt, Vice President for Academic Affairs and himself a marine biologist. Later, we met a number of other members of the University staff and were able to plan a full program of shore activities.

On Wednesday, while work progressed on various parts of the ship's machinery and the new hydrographic wire (which was obtained so quickly only through the very generous cooperation of Scripps Institution of Oceanography) was being reeled on the drum, we inspected the Marine Laboratory on Coconut Island under the guidance of the Director, Mr. Vernon Brock, who kindly arranged for transportation. While at the lab, Dr. P. Helfrich, at our request, gave a most interesting and informative talk on the poisonous fish problem in the Pacific. In the afternoon, we were taken in three of the lab's skiffs to a reef in Kanehoe Bay, where the students were checked out in the use of SCUBA gear and had their first introduction to a coral reef. Everyone was most enthusiastic about the experience. A visit to the University of Thursday gave an opportunity to inspect the rapidly developing campus and particularly Edmondson Hall, and to hear Drs. Albert Tester, William Gosling, and Allison Kay explain some of the work that was going on.

Friday morning was devoted to a field trip to Nanakula Bay, led by Dr. Kay. The work was in the intertidal zone on a rocky outcrop in the sand beach, and many interesting specimens were collected. Bob Beeman, who is writing his Ph.D. thesis on tectibranches, was particularly elated to get numerous specimens of Aplysia and Dolabifera, the latter genus new to him. In the afternoon, a visit was paid to the Bishop Museum.
Many of the local scientists, including Drs. Hiatt, Helfrich, Gosline, Laevastu, Kay, Maxwell Doty, E. S. Reese, Mr. Brock, Jack Marr and others, including a large group of biology students from the University, visited and inspected the ship. The ship's company spent most evenings visiting with various old or new friends on shore who, without exception, did all that they possibly could to prove that generosity and hospitality is the trademark of the Aloha State.

A short time before we were to sail on the morning of Saturday, August 3rd, Captain Olsen's friends, the Allens, arrived with a pleasant surprise. Their two daughters had marshalled all of their friends and raided (with the owner's permission, I understand) all the frangipani trees in the neighborhood. They had spent an entire day stringing the blooms to make the grandfather of all leis. The result was a streamer of fragrant creamy flowers 70 ft. long, and this they festooned in graceful curves over the bowsprit of TE VEGA. I am sure that not many ships can sail out of Honolulu so bedecked. When we left, we floated the flowers on the water as an indication that we would return. I am sure that none of us will soon forget Hawaii.	

On leaving the harbor, we set a course for Penguin Reef which extends as a broad shoal area southwest of Molokai Island. Having been over very deep water for practically all of our cruise so far, and due for another long stretch of equally deep water, we wanted to try out our bottom gear at conservative depths and work outward gradually before risking our entire cable and testing the strength of the winch at anything near capacity. Although we should have liked to have two or three times as much water, topography dictated that we work in about 26 fathoms. At this depth, we made a hydrographic cast and took a dredge haul. The gear brought up coral boulders and some live coral, mostly Porites. Bright sponges, bryozoans and colonial tunicates painted vivid patches on the dead coral, and the crevices were loaded with worms, crustaceans, echinoderms and molluscs of various kinds. Among the latter was the prize of the haul, a brilliantly red stomatopod about two inches long with its telson armed with a fantastic pincushion of stout spines. We have been speculating that this animal must crawl into holes in the coral and use the telson as an operculum or stout door to keep intruders out. Another interesting animal from this haul was a small very elongate carapid fish living in the mantle cavity of a clam.

Working southward under fair winds, we encountered the subtropical convergence with its overcast sky and frequent heavy rain squalls. It was the object lesson or field demonstration that aptly illustrated one of Dr. Thompson's earlier lessons. Here, on August 6th we made a hydrographic cast. It had been our intention to go to 5000 m., but the fathometer showed a depth of only 1470 m. where the chart indicated that there should be more than three times that much water, so we had cut the cast short. With bottom that close, we tried out the dredge again, but unfortunately, with 3550 m. of wire out and an angle indicating that it should have been safely there, it came up full of plain sea water with no indication that it had touched bottom. We had to be satisfied with a couple of surface hauls using the half-meter net. These caught bright blue copepods, colonial radiolarians, salps, siphonophores, egg chains and a single fish larva. Then we hurried on.

Unfortunately, our fathometer, which gives beautiful traces while we are not moving, will not register while we are under way. The problem is probably the accumulation of air bubbles around the transducer, and this is a problem that we will not be able to solve until we go into drydock. The sounding while on this station indicated that we were over an uncharted sea mount or guyot. It would have been most desirable to stop and investigate it by soundings and sampling, but our commitment in Singapore forced us to move on. I am more than ever convinced that the uncommitted schedules originally planned for IE VEGA are most desirable, and I am already looking forward to the day when we can really stop and investigate any interesting thing that shows up in our work.
On the 8th, about 200 miles northwest of Palmyra Island, we took another hydrographic station, used the half-meter net on the surface and shot the Tucker trawl with 3000 m, of wire. We estimate that it reached a depth of 1400 m., and it brought in a fine collection of deep-sea fishes, including the gulper eel, Eurypharynx pelecanoides (possibly the most bizarre fish that lives in the sea), snipe eels, melampaeids, myctophids, etc., etc., as well as red shrimps, a large tomopterid worm, various squids, deep-sea jelly fishes and numerous other associated animals. Unfortunately, the gear appears to be too large to handle, and I am afraid that we will have to cut it down. It was a hard and time-consuming task to get the bridle, pipes and depressor in, and while we were doing this, the cod-end and bucket were being given a beating by the surface waves. As a result, a large proportion of the delicate specimens were very severely damaged.

Working southward, we figured we were about in the southern part of the Equatorial Counter Current on the 12th and here we made another hydrographic cast and decided to try the 21-ft. Tucker trawl once more after having provided it with additional lines to aid in hauling it on board, and rigging blacks on the boom rest to take these lines. The trawling wire went through a number of curious contortions. It trailed very sharply to port, straightened out to a degree and then not only led out to port again but ran ahead of the ship as we were hauling in. We must have been passing through the Cromwell Current, which in some places has been reported to run under the surface layers at as much as 3^ knots. If it was moving as fast as this in our area, and if we were drifting to the west at 2 knots, as the Captain estimated, and going ahead at 1 knot, the net may have been pulled through the water at depth at 5 knots or even more. Whatever happened, it proved to be too much of a strain, and the net came up with the pipes bent nearly double (in spite of a triple bridle on the top one) and the webbing ripped and torn. Ln spite of the difficulty, we got a beautiful and rich catch. Deep-sea angler fishes, black melanostomiatids, Malacosteus, hatchet fishes, snipe eels, lantern fishes, melamphaeids, etc., lots of the pelagic sea cucumber Plagothuria, magnificent large red prawns of several different kinds, medusae, siphonophores, salps, fantastic amphipods, a very large isopod and numbers of other goodies. The most spectacular catch was probably the largest phyllosome larva of some unknown spiny lobster that I have ever seen. It was flatter than a pancake and transparent as glass, and it measured about three inches across the disk! This beast evoked more interest and comment than any other in the catch. For a time in the doldrums, the wind died to practically nothing, and we had to use the motor. Now on the 17th we have been under sail for a couple of days. On our best day, we averaged 9.9 knots from noon to noon, but the wind is irregular and while we sometimes do 13 or 14 knots to the delight of everyone, we more often do 6 or 7 or 8. This, together with the fact that we stop periodically to work, makes the passage rather slow.

Time passes in a fairly routine way with daily lectures (Dr. Thompson has now finished with his discussion of physical and chemical oceanography, and a very good series it was) occupying most or all of the morning. Stations use up many hours if they are deep ones, and the chemical work and examination, preparation and packaging of the biological material takes many more. Sometimes special events break the routine, some unpleasant, like the loss of a bathythermograph through the parting of the BT wire (luckily we had purchased a spare wire in Honolulu), most of them pleasant, like the sighting of a whale or the capture of three Portuguese men of war (Physalia). One of the students, Don Thompson, got a practical demonstration of its stinging power, but his discomfort was only temporary. Sometimes we take salt water baths in the bos's chair slung over the side, which can be a bit exciting if we are making good speed; at one station a number of people went swimming in the clear blue water a couple of miles deep. Pranks are played now and then; the third mate's cap appeared one morning tied to the base of the radio antennae on top of the fore topmast. It is not quite sure who put it there, but there are not many people on board who can go that high, far above the spreaders. The evenings are usually occupied by working up data, reading, writing, cards or chess, and on three occasions we have had illustrated lectures by Miss Bennett who has brought along a fine collection of Kodachromes of birds, coral reefs, marine invertebrates of Australia, etc.

On the trip from San Diego to Honolulu, Captain Olsen tried some amateur psychology. After an original admonition to be careful of water, he said no more until our supply ran low. Then he cut it off except for one hour in the morning and one in the evening, and permitted no showers. Three days without a bath brought the water problem into sharp focus, and on this leg of the cruise everyone has been careful and we are in fine shape. It appears that we shall have no trouble on that score from now on.

Tutuila is in sight, and we expect to be in Pago Pago by 1700 hours.

Rolf L. Bolin Chief Scientist
RLB:bm
