TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT 20 
Dr. Rolf L. Bolin

The delay in Suva was long and exasperating and it was not until May 24 that we were finally able to get away. Although we were anxious to tackle some open—water work, the time in port was not wasted. If the ship had become permanently affixed to the wharf the astonishing richness of life in the area would have provided material for many years of fruitful endeavor. The scientific party split into subgroups and pursued further investigations in the mangroves, on the mud flats, on the coral reefs forming a barrier at the harbor entrance even as far afield as about 60 miles from Suva. Dr. Bieri and one group investigated the plankton distribution in the harbor and began neuston investigations. Dr. Wolff led another group on dredging expeditions in the channel, using the small boats. Roberta Smith studied foraminiferal distribution and density on tidal flats, and Dave Egloff turned his attention to the symbionts living on or in the blue starfish Linkia. This last investigation a series of amazing forms ranging from two different polychaet worms through a blue copepod, a blue and white shrimp, a beautiful blue gastropod mollusk, to a carapid fish living in the stomach of the starfish. This particular study should lead to a perfectly fascinating publication.

Of course there were other activities as well. I lectured to the Fiji Society and gave two radio interviews. Various members of the scientific group participated in such diverse social affairs as spending a night as guests in a native village, attending a Rotary luncheon, participating in the dedication of a new hospital wing, gorging themselves on a tremendous native-style banquet at the Koro Levu Hotel, inspecting the magnificent 9000-ton British cable laying ship "Mercury" and having lunch with the captain, enjoying the hospitality of dinner with many of the good private citizens of Suva, and reciprocating as best we were able by displaying our ship and explaining our work to a stream of visitors.

Among the more interesting events was our exchange of visits with the scientific personnel of the two Russian ships "Shokalskiy" and “Voeyskov." These ships have been carrying out meteorological investigations over a wide area of the Pacific and came in to Suva for supplies before continuing to the Cook Islands for observation of the total solar eclipse due on May 30. Shortly after their arrival we invited the scientists on board and arranged a display of instruments and a representative collection of the animals we had collected. In spite of the difficulty of communication imposed by language barriers, the Russians seemed to understand and to be interested in our program, and over cake and punch we managed, with the help of an interpreter, to answer their questions and to exchange pleasantries.

Later we were invited to visit their much larger ships, where we examined their equipment ranging from hydrographic current meters and nansen bottles to the electronic components of their radio and rocketsondes. They served us applies, chocolates and sweet Crimean wine in which they toasted our health and success. They gave us books and matches, and taught us to roll cigarettes with Russian tobacco and newspaper. We came to the conclusion that Izvestia did not taste very good, and in fact turned one of our party quite green, but unfortunately there seemed to be no copies of Pravda on board. Finally we were invited to see a Russian movie which we found to be totally unintelligible since none of us understood a word of the dialogue. However, it was a good party, and since both groups studiously avoided any discussion of politics we parted friends in an aura of good fellowship.

Although Suva had provided us with the worst possible weather, including the rainiest first week of May on record, we were treated to two or three nice days toward the end of our stay and we sailed on the 24th in bright sunshine and with a gentle breeze. Everything seemed to be going smoothly, but we had hardly left port before the second engineer reported he was ill. Dr. Frost diagnosed it as possible pneumonia. By evening the engineer had a raging fever of 103°, and the ship slowly reversed course in case we might have to place him in the hospital in Suva. However, Dr. Frost's ministrations worked wonders, the fever began to abate, and in the morning we were on our way again, the engineer in bed but with the prospects of complete recovery in a few days.

This was the first time on the entire cruise that weather conditions were suitable for open water work, and with great glee we shot the Tucker trawl to a depth of 500 meters, and again at night to 100 meters, and we also put the dredge on the bottom in 1600 meters of water. None of the catches were rich. Nevertheless they were interesting, with their organisms from far below the surface.

On this passage we passed the 180th meridian and had two Tuesdays the 25th. On the second of these we came to Wailangilala, the northernmost of the Lau Group and our first true coral atoll of the cruise, we had previously seen an "almost-atoll" at North Astrolabe Reef, but this was spoiled by tiny Solo Island, the tip of a subsiding volcano, projecting from the center of the lagoon and technically turning the ring of coral into a barrier reef. Now we had a textbook example of a real atoll. It had only one small island on the rim and a total population of two lighthouse keepers, but the dense vegetation, the coconut palms leaning into the wind, the gloaming white beaches, the pale green shallows flocked with purple splotches of submerged coral heads, the cobalt blue of the deeper part of the lagoon, and the line of white breakers along the horizon, limiting this small island world, made it perfect. From our anchorage within the shelter of the lagoon we struck out and visited the lighthouse, investigated the beaches, ran a very successful fish station, night-lighted for small fishes, caught larger ones on hook and line, dredged in the lagoon, took neuston samples, and kept generally busy. We would gladly have stayed longer, but our time was getting short.
At about 10 o'clock on the 27th we raised the anchor, took one more haul with the heavy dredge, getting several gallons of what looked like wet white plaster containing a number of white crabs and mollusks, and sailed out through the narrow passage in the reef.

We had intended to go to Niuatobutabu but the wind dictated that our course be somewhat to the north of a direct line to this island and, finding ourselves close to Niua Fo'ou we decided to pay a short visit to this most northern of the Tongan Islands. Niua Fo'ou is the tip of a volcano with the crater filled by a lake so that the island looks like a doughnut on the map. Several eruptions within historic times have laced its sides with steams of frozen black lava. The contrast between the lush green forests and the black jumbled lava deserts was spectacular. The desolation of the latter made it clear why the government had moved the entire population to other islands during the time of the 1964 eruption. What was surprising is that a considerable number of these people have now returned and are living contentedly on a speck of land that may erupt again at any time. Some of us walked up to the rim of the crater and looked down at the lake which contains a number of hot springs. Others walked around part of the island. The main points of biological interest were small green parrots and lovely white tropic birds. The sea was relatively barren. Diving showed a bottom of basaltic rock and black volcanic sand with very few organisms living on it. There were a few isolated corals, sea urchins, mollusks and fishes, but nothing to compare with the richness that we had found elsewhere. The most interesting thing we saw was a black and white banded sea snake hunting on the sea bottom, crawling around and sticking its head into crevices or under rocks, just as a snake might do on land. I watched it for 15 minutes before it came up for air and swam away. How long it had been down before we first spotted it I do not know.

Weather continued good and after more hydrographic stations and midwater trawl and neuston hauls we arrived at Niuatobutabu on the morning of May 31. This island was as rich in its shore fauna as Niua Fo'ou was poor, and we had a fine time working in the coral of the fringing reef. However, our first duty was complete formalities with the government officials, and since the landing place was about two-and-a-half miles from the village in which the officials had their offices it consumed several hours of walking and talking. Aside from the inter-island boat that brings supplies and picks up copra almost every month, we were the first vessel to visit Niuatobutabu since 1960. The presence of strangers was so exciting that the students of the Catholic Mission school deserted their classrooms to swarm around us, and the adults were scarcely less restrained. Since our arrival was such a big event, the Police Magistrate issued an invitation to all of the ship's company to come to a party on the evening of June 1. It was a wonderful affair. At dusk a tractor trailer met us at the landing and took us to the village where the government buildings were located. We found a large hall tastefully decorated with crossed palm fronds on the walls, ferns and banana plants in tubs, and lots of brilliant red hibiscus blooms attached to the greenery. For a time we sat around and talked and drank wine. Then there was a brief formal Kava ceremony, after which we were ushered into another room where a sumptuous Tongan feast had been set. On the mats covering the floor, banana leaves had been spread as a tablecloth, and on these roasted pigs and chickens, yams and breadfruit, leaf containers of fish and other ingredients cooked in coconut milk to make tasty stews, various fruits and drinking coconuts were arranged in gay patterns. We set ourselves down as well as our creaking European knees would allow and dug in with our fingers to one of the most delicious meals any of us had ever had. There was speech making in Tonganese with translations into English and speeches in English translated into Tonganese. Since the Polynesians have certain individuals designated as Talking Chiefs whose main vocation in life is to make a fine art of oratory, I really believe that we were outdone. The final part of the party consisted of music and dancing, including four solo dances in native costume that gave us by far the best impression that we have had of South Sea entertainment. We were all sorry when time came for us to board the trailer once more for the trip to the landing. The entire village saw us off, and we left part of our hearts with them.

The reefs were good, in marked contrast to the barren ground encountered at Niua Fo'ou, and when we sailed away on the morning of the second we had large collections to take care of. The wind was right, the weather good and we made a very satisfactory passage to Pago Pago in American Samoa. Here we found that progress was in full swing and that the town had changed markedly since our first visit two years ago, with a television tower on one of the high mountains, with a new hotel going up on the site of the Goat Island Club where we had been so well entertained, and several buildings already completed both in town and the neighboring countryside. However, some of the people who were here in 1963 and knew of us from that visit turned up to prove that Samoan hospitality has not changed and that Pago Pago is a good place to terminate a cruise.
