TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT 21 
Dr. Rolf L. Bolin

The scientific party for Cruise 8 assembled at Pago Pago, the capital of American Samoa, on the morning of Sunday, June 20. Arrival was a bit hair-raising for the final group, since it was only after the fifth pass that the plane from Honolulu was able to set down on the cloud-and rain-obscured runway in a cross wind that developed gusts of up to 50 miles per hour. The steep mountains bordering the airfield did nothing to ease our anxiety in that thick pea soup, and when the wheels finally touched down on the clear end of the runway a sigh of relief went up, and we did not mind when the visibility was again reduced to a few yards by enveloping clouds before the plane had lost half of its landing speed.

Sunday and Monday morning were spent on indoctrination lectures, church attendance, quick excursions around the island of Tutuila, promenades along Centipede Row where the government officials live, and around the grassy oval that constitutes the main street of Pago Pago, in fraternizing with the local population, in topping off the fuel and water tanks, in laying in last minute supplies, in dodging rain squalls and hoping for the wind to abate.

At last, on Monday afternoon, we cast loose and set sail for Vava'u, in the northern group of the Tongan Islands, where we planned to give the students an indoctrination of coral reefs before getting down to plankton studies which are to be main object of this cruise. The weather had not improved, and before we had cleared the sheltered harbor, which is the flooded crater of an ancient volcano, the first victims of sea sickness proved that Marazene is not always an effective preventative. Southward we surged through rough seas that made field work impossible. It was thought that lectures might be in order and would present no hazard, so the ten students who felt they could make it were marshalled in the mess hall. Dr. Bolin began what he believed to be an interesting and timely talk, but one by one the students took a more or less hasty departure. It is shattering to the morale of the speaker to have his audience walk out on him, whatever the cause, and when the audience was reduced to five the meeting was cancelled.

On June 23 we sighted Vava'u and by midafternoon were anchored off the town of Neiafu. After medical and customs clearance, the senior staff paid a courtesy call on the Governor and, much to our dismay, were informed that he had no information concerning our permission to work in Tongan waters and that we would be confined to the ship until he could contact the authorities in Nukualofa for information as to what to do about us. Clearance was forthcoming the next morning, and our work began with a diving expedition to some shallow coral reefs in order to check out the students in the use of Scuba gear.

As we expected, all of the numerous inlets and channels that characterize Vava'u provide good coral areas and we visited several different places, all of them showing us something new. In one area we collected along a transect perpendicular to the shore from the tide line to a depth of 50 feet, beyond which the bottom plunged at an angle of about 45 degrees into the eerie deep blue of unknown fathoms. From forests of staghorn coral in shallow water, the seascape gradually changed until at our diving limit fantastic vase-shaped colonies, as much as six feet across, predominated. Sponges, anemones, sea fans and jelly-like soft corals grew on and among the stony corals; tube worms showed bright circlets of tentacles; Tridacna and cat's-claw clams were heavy enough to make us think twice before bringing them to the surface; small pearl oysters were attached to the sea fans; cone shells, spider shells, cowries, sea cucumbers two feet long and nine inches in diameter, sea urchins with needle-like spines more than a foot in length, crinoids and multi-colored starfishes crawled around and engaged our attention and clouds of fishes swarmed everywhere, seeking shelter in the coral thickets or simply cruising past in the water above us. On the following day we ran a poison station for fishes along the same transect and collected about 185 different species, one of the richest hauls we have ever made.

Since we are now in a region where mangrove swamps are becoming rare we took advantage of the narrow bank along the upper reaches of an inlet where mangroves grow to investigate this interesting habitat. It was not extensive enough to give the eerie impression that one gains in the middle of the mile-wide swamps of Indonesia, but the effect of the prop roots in collecting detritus and mud and thereby transforming sea into land was clearly evident, and such characteristic and interesting inhabitants as the mud-skippers, Periophthalmus, and the fiddler crabs, Uca, with their great colorful claws, providing a striking contrast to the fauna of the nearby coral reefs.

Not all of the time was spent on work. On Sunday some of our group went to church, while others risked prison by trolling (without success) from one of the Boston whalers. We did not learn until later that it is illegal to fish on Sunday in Sabbath-conscious Tonga. We bartered with the natives for tapa cloth and woven mats and shell necklaces. The Governor, apparently embarrassed by having confined us to the ship on our arrival, invited the senior staff to a sightseeing trip around the island, which included tea at his residence and a most interesting visit to the Department of Agriculture's experimental farm, where an attempt is being made to diversify the copra economy by introducing pineapples and vanilla, other members of the party had opportunities for similar excursions, visited with various people, and got to know the island fairly well. In turn we entertained the Governor, the doctors, the manager of the experimental farm, the inspector of police, the customs man and various other dignitaries on board. One evening we were all entertained at a dance in the large concrete-floored shed of the Copra Board.

On the morning of June 30 we set sail for Pago Pago once more. This time the weather was good and we were able to lecture to capacity crowds. Sir Alister Hardy was at his inimitable best as he launched into discussions of his beloved plankton, and no one would have left, seasick or not. The problem of getting to Samoa and out again before the July 4 weekend kept us pushing along, with bathythermograph casts and keeping of the biological log as our only field activities. We made it into Pago Pago in the early afternoon of Friday, July 2, and proceeded at once to prepare for the next long leg of our cruise. Canton Island is the target.
