TE VEGA GENERAL NARRATIVE
INSTALLMENT 12


The nicest diversion on Anjouan, as far as I am concerned, came on July 20th when Monsieur G. Mattias, of the Direction General de l'Agriculture, fulfilled his kind promise to take me into orchid country. Starting from Mutsamudu in his Land Rover, we drove along the north coast, then over a pass in the mountains and down again to the east coast, and along this almost to the southern end of the island. On this trek we covered most of the 40 km. or so of macadamized road on Anjouan, passing through commercial plantings of coconuts, ylang ylang (a tree grown for the essence of its flowers, which is used in perfume), sisal, bananas, cocoa and tea, as well as through forests, up mountains, down valleys with dashing streams, through villages and towns with stone or wattle walls and, thatched or tin roofs lining streets barely wide enough to get through, which were crowded with people and goats and chickens. At last we turned off on a dirt road that twisted and climbed ever higher to provide a series of spectacular views of mountains and sea, until we came at last to an agricultural experimental station. Here we abandoned the Land Rover as unfit for the narrow, steep and rough trail ahead, and transferred to a jeep. Soon we left the bright warm sunshine and plunged into an eerie world of cloud at an elevation of about 2500 feet. The change in temperature was dramatic; five minutes previously we had been hot and sweaty; now it was definitely chilly. Visibility was cut to about one hundred feet by the dense fog, through which came a steady light drizzle that now and again turned into brief heavy downpours. Even here in these mountains, which from a distance seemed to be clothed in virgin jungle, a continual trickle of people on foot proclaimed that the overpopulation problem is not restricted to the better known areas of the globe; bananas were planted on the steep hillsides, and cattle tethered here and there showed the jungle not to be as untouched as I had supposed. In fact, the larger trees that had not been cleared away were fairly widely scattered. The dripping clouds and soggy ground provided a perfect habitat for ferns, mosses, liverworts and orchids, both epiphytic and terrestrial. They grew everywhere in this somber green and grey dream-world. While only two species of orchids, a beautiful white Angraecum and a hardly less striking pink Spathoglottis. were in bloom, I had no difficulty in collecting at least fourteen different kinds to gladden the hearts of the botanists at the University of California— and my own as well.

On Thursday, July 23rd, we picked up our long Line and fish traps for the last time on this visit and in the afternoon set sail for Nossi Be to replenish fuel, water and provisions. Under a spanking breeze the start was auspicious, with the ship heeled far over and streaking along with a very satisfactory bone in her teeth. Unfortunately, the wind began to fail within minutes, and that night the mainsail was furled and the engine started once more. After an uneventful crossing we arrived at Hellville on the afternoon of Saturday, July 25th, to be greeted by the personnel of the Laboratory with a welcome-back party featuring an elaborate buffet. Satisfying the inner man was only a part of the program which included dancing, guitar strumming by Kelly Blackburn, our marine technician, folk singing by all who thought they had voices, and the uninhibited practice of French-English conversation by everyone. It is amazing how effectively un peu words avec gestures and smiles can break down language barriers.

We immediately launched a collecting campaign for experimental animals (mud skippers, the crab Cardisoma. fresh-water portunids, small shrimps from the mud flats) and settled down to the busy routine of physiological investigations and evening lectures or seminars. That has been the established practice on this cruise. The students are now contributing to the seminar program, as well as to the field and laboratory work. Those who are far advanced in their graduate research report on their own investigations; those who arc relative neophytes discuss some phase of their special field of interest or review one or more scientific papers. The accompanying comments, with everyone participating, are often free-wheeling, and sometime the give and take gets a little out of hand, but this is all to the good. For example, the other evening Rosemary McCarthy's discussion of the role of cytochrome-C as a taxonomic tool developed into a shouting, table-thumping argument over scientific methods, scholarship and ethics, and lasted far beyond the allotted hour. It was accompanied by dark looks, harsh words, snide remarks and much glee--a really stimulating free-for-all. In the end general agreement was reached and peace settled down once more without any residue of hard feelings.

The routine work has been interrupted several times by activities of a different character. Leaving a number of people behind to carry on experiments in progress, a number of us took the whale boat and made the twenty-plus mile crossing to the mainland of Madagascar in order to collect fresh-water fishes. Our visit to the native village was interesting, we found a lovely spot for our picnic beside a shaded stream where pools alternated with riffles, the bird watchers among us had a fine time ogling sunbirds (Nectarinia) and brilliant blue kingfishers (Alcedo cristata), drongos (Dicrurus) and herons (Ardeola idea), crested terns (Thalasseus bergii) and tropic birds (Phaethon), we took about twenty-five species of fresh and brackish-water fishes, including the strange eel-like blind goby Taeniogobius, and in general had a fine time, but we paid for it with seven hours of rough, wet and uncomfortable travel over and back.

Another day we moved the ship to Tanikely, a small island about seven miles away, and explored the island and the surrounding reefs. The coral in the western Indian Ocean is not as rich and varied as it is in the East Indian region, but it is good enough to evoke admiration from our scientific party, only two of whom have been lucky enough to have worked in more spectacular areas. The gorgoneans, on the other hand, leave nothing to be desired. At depths of forty to sixty feet we swam leisurely among tremendous brown sea fans, fantastic red shrubs, long black rope-like tendrils, and ridiculous tufts of blue fingers. We explored this submarine playground and noted the clams and cowries, the star fishes and sea cucumbers, the nudibranchs and flatworms, while all around us unconcerned colorful fishes disported themselves, and an occasional large turtle paddled slowly away. We speared a few of the fishes and got one large purple-blotched sting ray (Dasyatis brevicaudatus) about four feet across. Unfortunately, the current in this area was so strong that an attempted poison station was an almost complete failure.

One day, while at anchor, a six-foot cub shark (Carcharhinus leucas) took the bait and provided some excitement in the landing. We got two remoras (Echinus naucrates) along with it, and Lee Morin had a chance for more tapeworms and flukes.

While we keep pretty busy there have been occasions for relaxation and recreation that have nothing to do with marine biology. There was the party that we gave for the people at the shore laboratory in slight repayment for their many courtesies to us. There was the early morning visit to the nearby National Forest Reserve to see the lemurs. We spotted approximately a dozen of them at a distance of only about twenty yards. They grunted and growled at each other, or possibly at us, swung their long tails, set the branches swishing by spectacular leaps from tree to tree, and stared at us through big round eyes in the uncertain light of dawn, apparently as interested in humans as we were in lemurs. There was the visit to the factory where the essence of the ylang ylang flowers is distilled for the perfume market. There was the basketball game between a team from TE VEGA and one from Hellville. Due, perhaps, more to our greater stature than to superior finesse, TE VEGA won by eight points! There was the superb dinner provided for the Captain and Senior Scientists by Dr. and Madame Pichon, the Sunday picnic on the beach at the northwest tip of Nossi Be, the enjoyment of the blooming coffee plantations where for a few brief days the delicate pure white flowers were marshalled in ranks of military precision along each branch to form a striking contrast to the dark green leaves. Everyone has had the opportunity to sample, on more than one occasion, the flavor of this pleasant and exotic place, and to enjoy the generous hospitality of the resident population.

Our work in Nossi Be was finished and we were due to depart for the Comoro Islands on August 10th, but, with the indifference to breaking promises so characteristic in this part of the world, the tanker did not deliver the water and fuel we needed until late on August 12th. On the morning of the 13th we sailed with a good supply of mudskippers and crabs to keep the scientific party busy.

Shortly after I had turned in that night, Dr. Gordon rousted me out again. He reported that a school of fish was following the ship just at the leading edge of the illuminated cone thrown by our stern light on the water. Flashes of bioluminescence along the edge of the light certainly made it appear that this was the case, and since the wake of the ship was not particularly bright it seemed that the fish themselves must be emitting the light at intervals. After admiring the display for a time, we tried shining a flashlight into the water ahead of the line of fire, and were rewarded by more flashes that faded in about two or three seconds. We were not being patrolled by fishes but were sailing through a dense swarm of animals that were stimulated to glow briefly by the energy of a light beam. Each glow seemed to indicate an organism about the size of a cigarette package. We tried to catch some by means of a dip net, but fire streamed out of the end of it, and when the net was brought on board it contained only some phyllosome larvae, small amphipods and fragments of jelly that would not glow. The light producers were probably ctenophores or siphonophores so fragile that they passed through the meshes like custard. After making twenty-seven stop-watch determinations of the duration of the glow after both long and short stimulation (1.4-4.1 seconds, with a 2.3 second average), we suddenly left the unknown organisms behind and were left with only the memory of an interesting and beautiful phenomenon. It was only after they were gone that we thought of trying to stimulate them by means of sonar. That is a project for the next opportunity.

-Bolin
