TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS MAIDEN VOYAGE--GENERAL NARRATIVE 

July 14. 1963. In the prospectus for Cruise 1, TE VEGA was scheduled to sail "on or about June 17." Toward the first of June, it became clear that there would be a short delay and the students were notified that they should await further orders before joining the ship. As time went on, all hope of having the ship leave from Monterey was abandoned, and the students were finally instructed to join the ship in fan Diego on June 30th, in time for a simple dedication ceremony on July 1st, whereupon the vessel would sail immediately. 

The dedication ceremony went off on schedule with a goodly crowd of well-wishers present. The ship went to the B Street Pier where brief remarks were offered by Dean Frederick Terman, Provost of Stanford University, Dr. Harve Carlson of the National Science Foundation, Dr. John Ryther representing the International Indian Ocean Expeditions, Dr. L. R. Blinks, Director of the Hopkins Marine Station, Dr. R. L. Bolin, Chief Scientist of the Expedition, and Capt. E. B. Olsen, Master of TE VEGA. After the ship was signified to be recommissioned by the raising of a burgee showing a red dolphin on a white field, visitors inspected her under the guidance of the students, and later there was a reception at the San Diego Yacht Club. The only thing wrong with the whole affair was that, instead of sailing past the Yacht Club into the golden sunset while the party toasted her departure on an exciting adventure, TE VEGA later returned to the shipyard for further work. 

There followed almost two weeks of burnt out rectifiers and coils in the generator, failure of delivery of promised parts that were essential, malfunction of the winch on sea trials so that we had to pull in a mile of hydrographic cable by hand, underproduction of fresh water by the evaporators, failure of the heads to flush properly, leaky drains, cables, newly arrived packages, workmen and tools cluttering the entire ship so that it was impossible to stow anything properly, etc., etc. ad infinitum. In spite of assurances that all this and the attendant delays are normal in ship conversions, the period will long be a well-remembered nightmare. 

Both the crew and the students took the whole affair fairly well, but at last lectures against the scream of drills boring holes in steel plates, trips to the Zoo, to Scripps Institution of Oceanography, to Point Loma for low-tide collection of plants and animals that could not be properly examined in the riot on board ship and an evening expedition to the desert were not enough to prevent a continuing and accelerating drop in morale. It was the consensus that the longer we stayed at the dock, the worse things would get with the ship and her personnel, and finally in desperation, we cast off at 2205 on July 13th and headed down the Bay. By midnight, we were on a westerly course through gentle swells, and the spirits of everyone on board perked up. Next landfall--Oahu! 

During the night, the wind picked up to about 16 knots and by morning there was a moderate sea. Most of the scientific party felt a bit squeamish, but only one student has been really sick. Dr. Thompson delivered a lecture on the structure of the Earth and the configuration of the ocean basins, and a little work was done in securing gear, but in general, it has been a day of trying to get used to the motion. Our efficiency will not be up to anywhere near normal until we get our sea legs. 

During the night three flying fish, Cypselurus californiensis, flew aboard and were picked up in the scuppers at dawn. They became the first biological specimens of the cruise and have been recorded as from Station 1. This evening a 1-m plankton net was lowered to an estimated depth of 220 m, and the students were given their first introduction to the pelagic life of the sea. It was the first ti.me that most of them had seen pelagic tunicates (Salpa fusifonnis and Thalia democratica) of members of the phylum Chaetognatha. The most appreciated organisms were the very iridescent copepods of the genus Saphirina and the grotesque amphipods Streetsia and Phronima. The catch was not spectacular, but adequate as a taste of things to come. 

July 15, 1963. A biological watch has been kept during daylight hours since we left, and information on drifting kelp, barnacle-covered wood, sea birds and marine mammals is building up. The most interesting record was a single frigate bird, Fregata magnificans, noted yesterday very close to the northern limit of its range. Shortly after noon today, we left the opaque greenish coastal waters and entered the clear blue water characteristic of the open Pacific. It was not long before "by-the-wind-sailors," Vellela vellela appeared sparsely scattered on the surface, indicating by their presence our entrance into a new habitat. 

Dr. Thompson gave another morning lecture, and this afternoon we sent out an unweighted 1-m plankton net, intending to pay out almost all of the hydrographic wire (which had not been properly spooled) and to lay it back on the drum in neat coils. With 3000 m of wire out, the strain seemed to be rather great and we decided to reel it in again. The catch differed markedly from the one of yesterday, and was much more interesting. It was not so cluttered with salps, and the presence of the small deep-sea fish Cyclothone signata in goodly numbers indicated that the net had gone deeper than 500 m. Lantern fishes, live and actively swimming heteropods (Carinaria carinata) and chocolate colored deep-sea medusae of the genus Atolla, were new and strange to almost everyone on board, and evoked considerable interest. 

The sails are all set, jib, staysails and main, the main engine has been secured and we are rolling westward at about 8 knots over a sparkling blue sea, with a broken sky overhead and the wind almost directly from the north. Things are much more pleasant on board under sail than under power; there is not so much noise and the ship is much steadier. 

July 16, 1963. Dr. Thompson lectured this morning about the materials on the ocean floor. These lectures take up considerable time, but they are very well organized and delivered, and the students are getting an excellent physical basis on which we biologists can build later on. 

Feeling that it was necessary to get the hydrographic cable spooled properly, we began to pay it out this morning with only a swiveled 5-lb. weight on the end to trail it properly. At thousand meter intervals or so) the ship was brought up into the wind, the speed reduced to a knot, and a little was reeled in, in order to make sure that the winch would function satisfactorily. We reached the point where the wire was wound regularly on the drum when we had reeled out 8544 m. At this point, with the ship headed into the wind, the wire parted as we started to reel in. 

The chief engineer, who was operating the winch, states that the indicator showed a strain of only 1500 lbs. It is our belief that this is well below the rated breaking strength of the wire and we are at a loss to explain the cause of the disaster. Until we can get the wire replaced, we shall have to limit our hydrographic work to the more superficial layers. Fortunately, we do have enough left to get well below the thermocline, but we want more than this. 

The afternoon was spent in readying the lab and gear and equipment for full scale work.
 
July 17. 1963. There were two lectures today Dr. Thompson on water chemistry in the morning and Miss Bennett on sea birds in the evening, the latter accompanied by an excellent series of Kodachrome slides. Miss Bennett's lecture was interjected to counter any feeling on the part of the students that they were being given too heavy doses of the physical sciences to the exclusion of biology.
 
Most of the afternoon was given over to study of material dipnetted from the surface while cruising along at about five knots (the wind has decreased), and in getting the large Tucker trawl in order. A number of students were also checked out on the bathythermograph, several casts being made for practice to depths of about 700 feet. 

July 18, 1953. We are beginning to shake down into ever more effective routine. Our study of dipnetted surface organisms has been most interesting, and we have learned to really appreciate Vellela. Those of us who were acquainted with it previously had considered it to be a pretty blue blob floating on the ocean surface and sometimes drifting in on shore to form untidy messes along the drift line. Now we recognize it as the dominant member of a well-defined community. 

We have taken a large number of specimens and noted that when oriented with the long axis to the north the sail always extends from NW to SE. We intend to see if the sail extends from NE to SW in other areas. It has been reported that populations of right-and left-handed individuals are dispersed by the wind into different areas. Underneath the colonies we found masses of small golden brown Vellela medusae, which were liberated without agitation by some specimens. A good many zoologists have not had the fun of seeing this stage of Vellela alive; it is unmistakably the medusa of a hydrozoan, even though totally devoid of tentacles. 

Most of the specimens turned out to be the hosts of other organisms. Almost all of them carried individuals of the pelagic snail Janthina. Yesterday these were all of a species that we were unable to determine, but today we began to get specimens of Janthina globosa, differing markedly from the other one in the deeper blue of the shell, in having a deep notch in the body whorl, and in building a much more elongate float of mucus-covered air bubbles and laying its eggs on the float in a different pattern. On occasion these snails liberated a reddish purple ink, said to be used to anesthetize the Vellela before eating it. We could detect no narcotization, but plenty of evidence that Janthina gobbled up the Vellela zooids with gusto. Also present on some of the Vellela were nudibranchs of the genus Fiona. These were gracious enough to pretty well clean up a Vellela, leaving only the shell, whereupon they would commit the final indignity of depositing egg masses on the skeleton that remained. Another, but not so common predator was a small crab about the size of my little finger nail. We have been unable to classify this with our limited literature. With this number of animals exploiting Vellela for food, it is easy to see the need for the production of huge swarms of medusae; it must be a job to keep ahead of the predators. The only guest on Vellela that did not appear to be eating it was a small gooseneck barnacle that appears to be either Alepas pacifica or small Lepas fasciculate. All of the organisms associated with Vellela were a beautiful blue in color, matching not only the host species, but also the water itself. It is interesting that two of them were also found on a stick of drifting wood that was half covered with gooseneck barnacles of the species Lepas antisera. These were the crab and the nudibranch. Although we could detect no morphological difference between the specimens taken from the two different substrates, they both differed markedly in color. Instead of being blue, they matched the brown of the wood and barnacles with which they were associated. 

The students are eating this stuff up, and when we get time to lecture about such things as pelagic communities, trophic levels or the importance of coloration, we shall be able to draw our examples from experience. It is my opinion that this cruise, in spite of serving as a shakedown, is going to be a very stimulating experience for all. 

This afternoon we shot the 21-ft. Tucker trawl twice and found it a bear to handle. The first time we had to bring it in for modification, the second time the depressor got tangled in the net and choked it off, so both hauls were failures. However, we are learning the techniques, and tangled in the meshes from the second haul we did find a couple of specimens of the pelagic nudibranch Phyllirhoe. This had the two nudibranch specialists among the students stopped. They were trying to classify it as a heteropod. When Miss Bennett told them what it was, they were at first dumbfounded and then wildly excited. So it goes on TE VEGA. 

July 25. 1963. The days have been rolling by with what I presume to be the usual trials and tribulations of a shakedown cruise. There is too heavy usage of water. There have been clogged sewage lines. The cold room is not cold enough. The winch has given us trouble a couple of times. Certain supplies that should be aboard cannot be found. Repeated attempts to get the Tucker trawl functioning properly have only demonstrated that the pipes for the top and bottom are too light and that the job of hanging the depressor is a delicate one. The bars have bent and been straightened again, and rebent; the depressor has insisted on twisting the entire gear and tangling it up, and we have suffered a tear in the net. I finally decided that we had better to wait until we get some unbendable bars in Honolulu before we try to rig it again. Bottom trawling has not been attempted since we want to put a good strain on the big winch in much shallower water than the 2000 to 3000 fathoms that we have under the keel now before we try it for real deep hauls. As a result, we have been entirely limited to plankton work. 

This has not been too bad since, while each catch looks pretty much the same at first glance, new and exciting things are constantly turning up. We have taken several of the beautiful surface nudibranch Glauca, a fairy-like creature decked in blue, green and silver, with finger-like cerrata on the ends of stubby arm-like projections. A cranchid squid looks like a tiny transparent football with ridiculously large eyes and short stubby arms glued to one end. A fantastically attenuated amphipod, Rhabdosoma, is about 4 inches long and measures only about one mm in cross section, illustrating beautifully one type of adaptation for flotation that is used by widely varied organisms. A small translucent creature, shaped like a watermelon, shows eight longitudinal stripes of reddish brown, a mass of oil droplets on each side of each stripe and an opening at one end with the hint of an introvert, or tentacles or something. No other details can be made out, and it has us all stopped; we cannot even place it to phylum. Guesses range all the way from a coelenterate through an echiuroid (which group has no pelagic members so far as I know) to a holothurian. Careful examination of a bit of material from the mouth region showed some nematocysts, but we do not know if these came from the animal itself or from its food. 

Several of the students have begun work on projects of their own interest. Robert Beeman is deep in the systematics of the heteropods. Richard Conrad, who brought his own sophisticated equipment along, has been measuring the luminescence of dinoflagellates. They are pumped in a small stream of water through a tube in a device towed behind the ship. Agitated by the passage, they flash, and the light is sensed by a sensitive photocell hooked to a photomultiplier; the impulse is transferred to a recorder on deck. Preliminary results look promising. Joan Gerdts, who has been working for some time on the taxonomy and zoogeography of the pteropods (a group of pelagic molluscs) without ever seeing a live one, now has more than 10 species to work with. Richard Mariscal is accumulating and preparing for later detailed study the nematocysts of the various coelenterates we encounter. Donald Thompson is showing signs of becoming enamored with the lantern fishes. It will probably not be long before each student has his own special project. 

Today, after long drawn out efforts to get the laboratory fully organized and the chemical techniques perfected by making determinations on surface samples, we occupied our first hydrographic station. It went off very well. Each time we carry out any operation, the ship's crew and the scientific personnel work together more and more smoothly. Today, when the vessel was brought: up into t~1.e wind, we came to a virtual stop, and the wire angle on the hydrographic cast was, I believe, less than it would have been in a motor vessel just drifting. It appears that we are really learning by doing, and that soon we shall form a very efficient team. 

Occasionally, the biological watch spots things that brings out everyone within the reach of a shout. The other evening, when we were about half-way across, it was a pod of about a dozen dolphins, Delphinus delphis, that played about our bow for about a quarter of an hour. Identification of them was made easy by the striking dark streak extending through the eye. Only a single whale has been spotted, and although this passed directly under the ship, it was not identified. A Laysan albatross paid us a visit and, fittingly enough now that we are in the tropics, tropic birds have appeared. 

We have sighted only three ships so far, LURLINE, the Danish freighter BELGIAN REEFER, and a distant tanker. BELGIAN REEFER paid us the compliment of altering course to come over for a closer look at us under full sail, and to wave. Actually, we were cheating and had the main engine turning over, but I bet we looked pretty anyhow. 

July 30. 1963. We are now in Kauai Channel; Diamond Head is visible ahead, and we shall be in Honolulu by 5 o'clock this afternoon. The intervening days have been passing in the same way; lectures in the morning with Hiss Bennett, Dr. Thompson and myself contributing. One successful session was a round-table seminar attempting to squeeze all of the information we could out of our observations of the Vellela community. These organisms disappeared after having been with us for several hundred miles, and the sea surface has become a desert. However, plankton hauls brought new treasures and everyone managed to keep busy. In fact, the pace got so hot, with a member of students in the lab until midnight or later, that we have decided to make Sunday a regular day of rest. It appears that we need some slack time. 

The wind that was good to us shortly after sailing lasted only a couple of days and then we were in the semi-permanent Pacific high. This brought only light breezes and cut our speed to four knots. The only cure was the main engine and for days we cruised under power seeking wind, scanning every cloud on the horizon for a promise, and even trying to lure it on by whistling. The high persisted over us with the barometer around or above 1030, and it was not until the 23rd that we were able to cut the motor. Then we had to use it again last night and this morning. When the wind blows, it is wonderful and we roll along at speeds up to 13 knots, with very little noise and vibration. The only trouble is that with the heel of the ship~ the deck becomes very hilly; one is either climbing or descending~ or wishing for a long or a short leg when moving fore or aft. On the port tack, the force of gravity is a bit too much for my typewriter and~ unless I help it along with an occasional push or type very slowly, the carriage will not climb the hill and the letters pile up on top of one another. 

Have to get up and look at Oahu now. The next installment will come from Pago Pago or Suva. 

Rolf L. Bolin
Chief Scientist 
RLB:bm 

