TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATTVE--INSTALLMENT 10 
(This was originally an audio recording that was transcribed when they returned.  The copy was a typed draft with corrections written by hand.  Every effort has been made to read and correctly transcribe these hand written notes.  There is mention of the tape being in poor quality by the original transcriber.  These are noted as are illegible notations.  Five faculty and six students speak.



Some weeks have elapsed since a narrative or indeed any news of general interest has come from TE VEGA. Should any faint-hearted landlubber think that we have foundered, perish the thought, for we are vigorously alive and busy.  

This is Cruise Bravo, the second of Te Vega’s three official international Indian Ocean Expedition cruises.  We feel well named, for we’ve been buffeted a bit by the vicissitudes of fate, but are undaunted.  

Perhaps before I go any farther, I should introduce myself.  I am Dixie Lee Ray, on leave of absence from the University of Washington and proud to work for Stanford as Dr. Bolin’s stand-in for this cruise.  Dr. Bolin is not aboard for these three months, having rotated home for a well-deserved respite.

The scientific party at present consists of a total of fifteen—eight students, six expedition scientists, and myself.  We were due to board the vessel in Colombo on the 1st of February.  

Knowing of the misfortune of the broken shaft, we postponed this departure time until the 15th of February, feeling that that was ample leeway.  But we reckoned without the ways of the EAST.  

Delay has added to delay.  Port congestion and dock strikes, red tape and just plain confusion kept Te Vega out of dry dock until Friday, the 21st.  Until then, we lived on board, anchored in Colombo harbor along with the fifteen or so other vessels all waiting for dock facilities.  

Movement through the harbor here is so slow that most shipping lines have now added a fifty per cent surcharge just to bring goods to Ceylon.  And the tragedy of the situation is that Cargoes of all kinds are desperately needed here; many, many supplies are running short.  Certain foods, textiles, medical supplies, bus and automobile spare parts, repair materials, tires, and so on are either completely lacking or, in order to obtain them, the people must stand for hours in long lines.

But these conditions and many others are illustrative of some of the growing pains of independence, and since, in any case, we can’t do anything to change the situation, we’re learning very quickly to live with it and to make the best of what we have to do.

We have started our classwork.  Each student is doing some reference work and preparing the reports on one or another aspect of the physical conditions of the environment in the Indian Ocean Area.  We have visited a number of beaches and nearby coral reefs, mainly for exploratory work, skin diving and in general becoming oriented into the fauna and marine life of this region.  We have had some lecture work, including a fine introduction into the tropical seaweeds by Hal Hackett from Duke University and an interesting discussion of the formation of beach rock by Dr. Louis Kornicker of Texas A&M.  In the latter case, Dr. Kornicker took us on a conducted tour of the sandstone formations directly in from of the Gaul Face Hotel, our abode during the time we have been in Colombo.  

We have done a bit of sightseeing; we have visited the Fisheries Institute, the Zoological Gardens, the Botanical Gardens, and so on.  And since last Tuesday have shifted our operations to the very southern tip of the island of Ceylon where we are now established in the New Oriental Hotel.  The proprietor of this magnificent building set up the ramparts of the old Dutch fort (the ramparts at least date back to the early sixteen-hundreds; the hotel is not quite that old) has provided us with an extra room in which we have set up a primitive, but nevertheless effective, little field laboratory.  From here, we have conducted our first transect across a coral reef and have had at least two very successful fish collecting expeditions ably led by Loren Wood from Chicago.  

But let’s hear what the other members of the scientific party have to say about our activities so far.  Here is Gary Beardsley from the University of Northern Illinois:

Many of the students on this cruise are very much interested in fishes, and we were looking forward to setting up a first poison station.

Dr. Wood suggested that our first day in Galle be spent scouting around to locate an area that would serve our purpose.  In order to be effective, the area had to be fairly calm, with little current and with enough fauna to yield a good representation.  An ideal area was not to be found, due to the large swells that have been hitting Ceylon for the last few days. But we did settle on a protected inlet which, if poisoned at low tide, would serve our purpose.

In addition to the larger area which we were to poison, there were also two tide pools which were about ten to fifteen feet wide and about two to three feet deep in the center. Bob	 Wallace and I decided that we would take about a gallon of poison and try to work this area.

Dr. Woods, plus the three other students, Carl, Dick and Timmy, began to administer the poison to the larger area. This area was about sixty feet wide, narrowing and shallowing towards the northern end, which was almost closed off at low tide. The south end deepened to about twelve feet and opened into a channel which ran around the north side of the Dutch fort.
Also into this area emptied a fresh water stream.  

The poison itself looks like heavy oil; in fact it is mixed with oil, but when poured into the salt water becomes milky.  

Almost immediately, small fish began jumping clear of the water. Usually the larger fish leave the area, especially the open water fish. 

We were kept busy from about eleven o'clock to one o'clock picking up all the fish, crustaceans, and molluscs. This is one good part of the poisoning. Rather than just picking up fish, you’re able to get a good representation.

Using poison, one collects many fish which can't be obtained any other way. Many of us were surprised at the number of fish we collected. We had dove here yesterday, but did not see three-fourths of those collected.  We ended up with a large garbage can full, most of them being around or under the three-inch size.  The rest of the afternoon was spent preparing and preserving the fish. Our station yielded thirty-two families of fish consisting of about eighty-five species. 

This was my first experience with a poison station and I found it very interesting and am looking forward to those we wish to set up in the Maldives, Chagos and Seychelle Islands.  

To date, we have visited four reef areas and I have been very surprised that the water has not been as clear as I thought it would be. While in the service, I was stationed about thirteen months in the Mediterranean area, and I guess this spoiled me. From all indications, though, the Maldives should be a lot clearer, and everyone is looking forward to doing diving and collecting in these areas.  

This is Robert Robertson speaking. I am Assistant Curator of Molluscs at the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. At the Academy, we are engaged in an ambitious project: taxonomic studies of Indo-Pacific Marine molluscs, group by group.  The marine mollusk fauna of the vast Indo-Pacific fauna area is far richer than that of any other region.  No American museum has adequate collections of marine molluscs from, among other areas, the Indian Ocean, India, the Maldives, and Chagar.  Therefore planned originally to spend one month at the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Mandapam Camp South India, using this as a base for collecting in the vicinity. Then I planned to join Cruise B of the TE VEGA. As things turned out, I spent almost two-months in southern India, putting the extra time to good use and obtaining a large and interesting collection. I expected to spend only a few days in Ceylon but have now been here fifteen days.  During the wait for the ship to be repaired, I have collected, with others of the scientific party, at three localities on the southwest coast of Ceylon--Beruwala, Hikkaduwa and Galle.  I might tell you of some of the molluscan highlights thus far.  Both at Beruwala and at Galle a wenteltrap an epitonium with common under incrustations of a colonial zoiemthed.  Some of these were partially embedded in the zoiemthed tissue, and therefore must have been feeding on these.  All wenteltraps probably feed on phlenterates.  But this is the first time that one has been found with a zoimthed.  Both at Galle and Beruwala, soft corals were abundant.  And with these, I found a few pairs of Calpurnius verrucosus.  This is a relative of the (illegible XXXX) with a white cowrie shaped shell with a mantle which when fully extended, covers the whole side.  The mantle has grey-black polka dots to it.  These beautiful animals feed on soft corals and the family to which they belong, the Ovuladae, all feed on phlanterates.  If found Calpurnus verrucosus on top of or at the edge of soft corals.  At Galle, I was very excited to find another Calpurnus lacteus, this one with a smaller shell and with fine yellowish-green spots on the mantle. This one I found only underneath the soft corals and they could be found only by tearing these up. Also at Galle several of us found old broken shells of another phalenterate-feeding gastropod, Rapa rapa.  This one lives embedded in soft corals.  I searched for these alive in vain.  Thus far, the mollusk collecting prize certainly goes to Gary Beardsley.  Diving in twenty-five feet of water off Hikkaduwa, he found a pair of Cypria argus.  This is a rare cowrie throughout the Indo Pacific and I’m told it is extremely rare on the Ceylon coast.  Gary, I am afraid, must be scolded for having lost one of the pair.  

This is John Garth speaking. Captain Fred Ziesenhenne and I joined
TE VEGA at Colombo on February 4th after three weeks of air travel that included New Zealand and Australia. We left again on February-sixth for Mandapan Camp, South India to join Dr. Loren Woods and Dr. Robert Robertson at Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute. While at
Mandapan Camp, we collected invertebrates intertidally, spent a day each on a Norwegian trawler, and made a five day jeep trip through South India. Among the places that we visited were Madurai site of the famed
Menatchee Temple, Cortalim, a resort built around a waterfall, Trivandrum, former capital of a native state, Cape Cormoran, southernmost point in India, where the waters of the Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal meet, Kodi Canal, a hill station at seven thousand feet in the Nilgeri Mountains, and Pariyar a game reserve with a herd of wild elephants of which we saw about thirty, twenty at one time. After three weeks in India, we returned to Colombo on February 27th.  Finding Te Vega in dry dock undergoing repairs, we left again for a week at Galle from which we visited Dondra head, southern-most point in Ceylon.  As of this date, March 12th, we are back aboard Te Vega and are looking forward to exploring the Maldive Islands where Captain Ziesenhenne will collect echinoderms and I will collect crustaceans.  

This is Fred Ziesenhenne, Curator of Echinoderms at the Allen Hancock
Foundation, University of Southern California. I arrived on board the TE
VEGA along with Dr. John S. Garth and after several days aboard the vessel we left for Mandapan in India to work at the International Oceanographic Station that had been set up by Dr. S. Jones at the Central Research Fisheries Station at Mandapan. While we were there working with Dr. Robert Robertson, and Mr. Loren Woods, I was asked if I would be interested in joining Dr. S. Jones on a tour of the Southern India Fisheries Laboratories. I was very glad to accept, as this was in payment for the tour I had taken Dr. Jones on in Southern California last August when he had been our house guest for three weeks. We were off in one of the Fisheries' vans, a GMC pickup built into a van with seating capacity in the rear and space for carrying equipment. Our first tour was to the city of Madurai, there to meet Dr. Rinjas of the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington, D. C., who is also a participant in the International Indian Ocean scientific cruises, and he is out to spend his time at Mandapan and adjacent coastline to study the fishes of the Capulnidae family. 

Our next stop was to the Tuticorin Fisheries laboratory on the southern coast.  Here we met Mr. K. Nabir and Mr. N. Pi, along with Mr. S. Mahadivan, who are engaged at present in charting the rocky areas off the coast to a depth of twenty fathoms, using aqua lungs as their method of swimming below the surface.  The usual procedure is to run over the area with a small boat, the fathometer operating and then come back to the areas of uneven bottom and dive and chart the rocky areas.  Tuticorin is famous for its pearl oyster fisheries and now that they are starting to do the otter trawling for prawns, it is very important that they know what the ocean floor contours are off the coast.  On our second day, we drove to Cape Cormoran, the southernmost point of India.  There we met a Mr. Sarma and his assistant Mr. A. R. Nair, who are engaged mainly in fishery statistics.  

While we were there, we had lunch at one of the local rest homes and visited the large shrine built in memory of Mahatma Ghandi.  There, on the 12th of February, his ashes were placed for a considerable period and later distributed to various places in India.  The 12th of February has become a national holiday to celebrate that occasion.  Inside of the large-domed building is a dais holding the picture of Mahtma Ghandi.  Over-head is a light shaft so constructed that only on the 2nd of October Mahatma Ghandi’s birthday, does the sun’s rays shoot through the light shaft and bear upon his photograph.  

From there we traveled to Nasir Coyle and then drove on the most traveled highway in India to Trivandrum, which is the capital city of the very wealthy Kerala State, one of the wealthier states of India.  The next day we went from Trivandra to Cabalan Beach. Here we met forty-two units of the Wally Biyam’s around-the-world cruise, consisting of Americans towing twenty-eight foot trailers with either Ford or GMC pickups.  This group had left Long Beach, California in October 1963.  The units were shipped directly to Singapore and from Singapore the caravan proceeded to the Burma border.  Here they were turned back and had to retrace their stps to Singapore and charter a vessel for $35,000 to take the forty-two double units to India.  They had been visiting in India since the 2nd of December and were very much pleased with Cabalan Beach.  The group plans to travel around the world and return to California and the West Coast sometime in 1965.  We spoke to Cecil and Mary Poe of Oregon and one of the nieces present was speaking of one famous graduate of Stanford who was also interested in fishes and it turned out to be none other than Dr. Alvin Seal, who established the aquarium in Manila and also for many years was director of the Steinhardt Aquarium in San Francisco. We also spoke to Mr. and Mrs. Nolan of San Diego and asked them of their problems in traveling cross-country, especially driving on the left-hand side of the road instead of right-hand. Apparently their group is well organized; scouts go out in advance to find rendezvous places where the forty-two units may park, and their gasoline is ordered and shipped ahead. In order to get the best fuel, they must dilute the regular gasoline with aviation gasoline.  

We next called at the Fakinjam Reesearch Laboratory and there Mr. Rasgopool took us for a tour along the beach front where some two hundred primitive fishing boats, oncas (?)	, sailboats, and even catamarans composed of four logs, would go out daily and fish in the bay, mainly with seines and nets. We also had time to stop at the village of Quillan, which is the headquarters of the Norwegian-India projects, consisting of one in fisheries, one in provided protected water supply and many related public health services.  The Norwegians have introduced small 32 and 36 feet diesel-powered otter trawl boats and they have opened up a number of large resourceful areas to prawn fishing.  

From Quillen, we went to Ornaculan-Kochin area, which is the headquarters for the Central Bureau of Fisheries Technological and Research Group. There is also a head office of oceanography of the Central Marine Fisheries Research Station, and several other units, one the oceanographic and Marine Biological Station of the University at Kochin and also the Indian Ocean International Expedition Plankton Sorting
Center.  At the Marine Fisheries at (Illegible-Ernaculum ?), I met a Dr. Al Alpasad graduate of the Hopkins Marine Station.  They have an oceanographic vessel, the 90-ft. Baruna (?).  It is a counterpart of our own Neptunis REX that is employed by the (Illegible –Bulbut?) Foundation at Moss Landing, California.  

Both these vessels are well equipped with the latest sonic, radar, and electronic equipment, and they are starting a very elaborate program of oceanography at the local post with the new vessel.

While we were there, we visited one of the many shrimp freezing companies. We happened to visit the Nalabal Shrimp Freezing Co., which operates seventy-eight shrimp trawlers off the coast of Cochin. The shrimps are frozen according to size, the lowest weight being 200-230 pieces per pound and graduated up to where they have one or two pieces per pound. All the shrimps are frozen in ten pound packages and sent to New York City for consignment.  

As an equal branch to Dr. S. Jones' Fisheries Research, there is a sister unit called Central Fisheries Technology, which is headed by Dr. A. N. Boyce. The technology section is composed of two units, the food processing and quality control, that look after all methods possible means of preparing and preserving fish. The second unit is technological,   dealing with types of fishing gear and various designs of the hulls and engines for vessels. This group is under the control of Mr. G. H. Puriyam.  

We also had the good luck one night to have dinner with Mr. and Mrs. E. B. Bakmar, who is the chief Norwegian of the Norwegian-Indian Project.  

We visited with Dr. C. V. Puriyan, the Director of the Biology and Oceanographic Department of the University at Ernaculem.  They are now operating a 40-ft. research vessel, the CONCHI, and are carrying out many projects in local waters.  

In adjacent building we found Director Dr. R. B. Unathan of the Indian
International Ocean Plankton Sorting Center. We were given a tour of the building and met quite a number of people who are now engaged in sorting the plankton that has been collected by the Ampton (?) Run and various other American vessels.  

After the day was nearly over, I still had time to pay my respects to the visiting U.S.S. GREENWICH BAY of the Persian Gulf fleet, maintained in the Persian Gulf to show the American flag. Since it was late in the afternoon, most of the officers had taken off for the day but I as fortunate enough to meet the executive officer, Commander Miller, and have a cup of coffee with him before leaving the vessel.

After three days at Ernaculame-Cochin area we returned to Madurai by way of the Pyramid Mountains, climbing up the sides of one valley with very scenic country, turning and climbing roads we crossed the main ridge at 3650 feet and continued in the tea plantations to the Haley Burea tea estate where Dr. Jones' brother, Mr. Dennis, is the official tea maker for the estate. There are 320 acres of tea being harvested that were planted in 1906 and 1914. Once a week the new shoots are plucked and only the two tender most tip leaves are retained. The workers pick the tea and are paid by the pound for their efforts. The tea is then taken to the large three or four story factory and processed through eight different stages that depends more or less on the relative humidity when the tea is being made. So there must be very exacting controls to produce the best tea. The tea, after weighing, is left to wither and then it is curled; then it is sorted, sometimes screened both through a fermenting process which makes it black. It is again dried and then finally grated by being blown through a wind tunnel. We made the mistake to open the last panel and were showered with very fine particles of tea. 

From the tea estate, we continued on to the Pariyar Game Sanctuary but arrived too late to take a boat out on the water to see the animals come down to the shore to drink. But we did observe monkeys around the grounds and a number of very interesting birds. Dr. Jones had to get back to Mandapan Camp the following day, so we did not have an opportunity to remain overnight.  If anyone has not driven in India, he is in store for a treat. Not only do they drive on the wrong side of the road, but it seems if there's anything to be done in India, it must be done on the center of the road. To aid in hulling the rice crop, rice is spread on the road in hopes that the passing wheels of an automobiles will help hull the rice. If washing has to be bleached, it is usually placed in the center or the road. Along with the rest of the competition are many busses and heavy lorries that occupy the center of the road and do not like to give up the right of way to overtaking cars. The slow bullock and ox carts also favor the center of the road. In addition to these, there are horse carts, there are push carts, there are hand carts, there are head bearers, then we have large herds of cattle, of caribou or the water buffalo, flocks of brown sheep, flocks of goats, sacred and stray cows, stray burros, wandering pigs, the very, very religious men that hear nothing and see nothing and fail to yield the way, plus chickens, turkey, and of course, many children. It is like driving through a wall of living flesh. The most important part of the car is the horn. And, it seems after constant blowing of the horn, just as the car approaches, a way is made in the flesh and the car passes through.

The penalty for hitting any of the above mentioned animals usually results in the local natives catching the driver, taking him out of the car, and beating him up, in some cases beating him to death. As a result, there is quite a bit of hit and run driving now. Rather than being beaten up, the driver takes his chance and drives away which also is not the proper thing to do.

We had our little experience when we came to the town of Chitkermanar, a little Tamil Indian community some thirteen miles from Madurai. I had been sleeping at the time and was awakened by several hundred white-clad Tamil natives who bodily picked up the pickup truck and carried it back to the site where the elderly gentleman, a Tamil, was struck.  There was quite a bit of commotion.  At that time it would have been rather easy to upset the car and throw a little match into the escaping gasoline and it would have been quite an incident.  Dr. Jones as on hand and immediately got in touch with the leading men of the community and after discussing the problem, the Tamils wanted one hundred rupees as damage.  And Dr. Jones convinced them that the proper thing to do was to go to the police station, which we did and spent some two and a half hours while we were there.  

Finally the head inspector of the district was brought in to interview the Tamil gentleman who at first faked that he could not hear. After talking for some time and getting no result, the crafty inspector spoke to one of the sons and said “Your father is an old man, he probably will die, he will not live very long, so better we get a big knife and cut him open and see what is wrong with him." Upon that statement, the old man regained his voice and began to talk.  The next process was to get the gentleman into a hospital.  And again, the old Tamil refused to go to the hospital; all he wanted was has one hundred rupees for his damage. So the inspector said, "Since I am not a doctor, I do not know much about medicine, the only way I can tell where it hurts you the most is to get a big stick and commence beating you. And when you holler the loudest, then I know that is where you are hurt.”  Well, after a few minutes, the man agreed that probably it was best we go to the hospital.  So we loaded the gentleman in and several of his sons, drove thirteen miles into Madurai, got to the hospital and spent another two and a half hours waiting for the doctor’s decision.  After an inspection, it was revealed that the old Tamil gentleman had nothing more than a bruised foot. Apparently, according to the driver, when the horn was sounded, the elderly gentleman cleared the road and then just as the car got near, turned around and stepped into the path of the automobile.  The driver swerved; although he hit the gentleman, the tire just ran over his foot. So out of the window went the idea of getting the one hundred rupees and the doctor said he would look after the man. But since we had to go to the, police station and report the incident, we also had to take the car the following morning to the inspector to be sure that the car was in complete running order, which we did and the car passed the examination first class.  But for an American, driving on the Indian highways with all the traffic and all the excitement that is one night that the Tamils picked up the car and walked away with it will be the one that shall be remembered.  We did, however, return to Mandapan Camp at noon the next day in order for Dr. Jones to finish his business and make his appointments.  But the night at Chitkermanar will be one to be remembered.  

This is Loren Woods, Curator of Fishes at the Chicago Natural History
Museum.  I came to the Te Vega by way of the Anton Brunn, a cruise in November and early December and Mandapan, where I expected to stay from mid-December until the TE VEGA was ready to sail from Colombo on February lst.

As it turned out, the stay in Mandapan was much longer than that, and so I made good use of my time collecting fishes all around one small island that lay out in the straits between India and Ceylon. There were several reasons for working on this one island. One, it was well offshore so that the fishermen who depend on the shore fishing for their beach seining and their living could not say that our poisoning had any effect on their livelihood, as they blame any new thing, any system of fishing such as offshore otter trawling uh, on their poor, uh they blame their poor catches on this.  So I worked all around this island and was able to get a very good and I think fairly complete collection of the fishes that live there.  There had never been Rotenone used around Mandapan Camp so that many of the fishes that we caught were either quite rare or were unknown to the fisheries people at the station there. Before I go on, there is one thing that I should say in connection with Ziesenhenne’s tape concerning Rinjas, who is here studying the Cupiedae.  

I guess he decided not to say it.  I arrived in Colombo, along with Ziesenhenee, Robertson, and Garth, toward the end of February and the next day was able to go out with some of the enthusiastic students and one of the local divers to the reef just south of Galle Face Hotel for an afternoon’s diving.  The reefs here are mainly sandstone with very little live coral growth, but the number of fishes was tremendous. Many of them are quite used to divers so that they're fairly shy and, whenever the diver is near them, they hide under the ledges and in holes so that it's necessary if you want to even see them to pull yourself down and look under all of the ledges and rocks in order to see the variety of fishes and angel fishes that normally live there. It's been possible too, to make some observations on the fishes, things that are well known, but things that we were on special look-out for, things to show the students.  One of these was the habit of trigger fishes when they’re chased of ducking into a hole, generally a small one, where they lock themselves in.  At Bariwala, there were very small trigger fishes just outside of the breaking waves in the beach area and here the pebbles that the triggers got into were enough so that you could actually pick them up with your hand and then up above the water loosen the trigger or shake the fish out.  We also were able to see the parasite picking wrasses, labroidies that were present on the reefs in large numbers.  The fishes come to them and posture in order to have their parasites picked and none of the fishes are particularly shy when they’re in this vicinity and least of all the wrass because if there are no fishes to be picked, why it comes and will pick on the diver’s legs.  Also, there were large lion fishes. These have been pointed out to several of the students and one has even been collected. These, like so many of the other fishes that are constantly pursued by spear fishermen, will hide under the rocks. The (ceritids) are fairly abundant and these will cling to the edges of the rocks and work their way up and down. Another thing that we have seen in large numbers were goat fishes feeding the patches of sand between the coral rocks. These actually push the small pebbles out of their way and rub with their clarvals the space that the rock had occupied. In Hicadua, the goat fishes were accompanied by yellow snapper that moved when they moved from place to place and hung right above them. I don't know whether there to dash in and pick up any supply of food, or just for company. At Galle, too, while we were diving, and looking for an area to poison, and in the area that we finally did treat and collect all of the fishes from, there was a good supply of gobies living in holes in the sand, some of these living with digging shrimp, so that by lying at the surface we could watch the digging and then as we approached, the shrimp would disappear, but not until after the gobie had gone down the hole. In our collecting with Rotenone, we've been able to gather several fishes that I think are not reported from here.  One of the most interesting to me was a little calixadities.  I don’t know exactly what it's distribution is, but it isn't in any of the common reference books that we have of this area, although it was reported from the Marshall Islands. In our diving at Hicadua using SCUBA, we went offshore in two outriggers through the surf and beside some tall granite spires. Actually, they seem like rather short granite spires til you go down into the water some thirty feet and see the sheer walls that these things have and the depth from which they rise. Here the currents were fairly strong, but by just letting these currents carry us through the channels, we were able to approach schools of fishes, particularly small chromis with a brilliant yellow tail, and in the quiet openings in the coral there were large schools of apiganets.  Also, at some thirty to forty feet deep, by peering into the holes and crevices, we saw squirrel fishes, mirprissis and holofentris and under the ledges here were large schools of harvest fish. This is an extremely abundant fish on all of the reefs here but generally in a little deeper water or in the more open parts of the reef where the surf is actually breaking so that you have to get under that surf in order to see the fishes. Another one that I had never realized how abundant they might be on the reef were the monotaxis, the small monotaxis.  I haven't seen any large ones so far, but the little ones with the bright yellow spot on the side is also very abundant. Diving at Hicadua, too, we saw generally in the distance schools of black bumphead parrot fish with a grooved tail, very irregular tail. Some of these were quite large, possibly up to three feet long, but perhaps this is an exaggeration due to the magnification and maybe they were only two feet long. We only saw one barracuda and no sharks. Three of us had cameras and some that were taken by Carl have already been printed so that they turned out fairly well, although he isn't pleased with them at all and hopes that another roll will do much better. 

One of the most surprising things that we've seen on the reefs is just the great variety of fishes that are living there. Many of these are fairly curious so that they come out of their hiding places if you don't approach them--if you're just swimming or drifting by--and you're able to see them and tabulate them.	There are half a dozen or more kinds of butterfly fishes that are always in evidence and I've been constantly surprised with the number of comacentradie and of acanthuradie.  The comacentrids, of course, and the holacentrids, many of these I have never seen alive before, although many of the small butterflies have found their way to the aquarium in Chicago and some of them, of course, are found in Hawaii, so that I’ve seen them swimming on the reefs there. But actually we haven't spent enough time or taken enough time to stay in one place and observe the fishes to see what they are actually doing beside watching us and hiding or getting out of our way. We haven't yet become part of the landscape. Perhaps it is because there are so many skin and SCUBA divans around and because the fishes are chased so much, that they are rather shy and will duck and hide as soon as they think there’s any danger. We-hope We're hoping that the fishes in the Maldives are much less sophisticated so that we can make some additional observations. 

The students have been trying to learn the families by going over those that we've collected and in order to help with this, we visited the fish market Galle on several occasions and picked up just a scattering of the different orders or fishes that represent the different orders, and these have been brought on board and between here and Mahe we will probably spend some time learning the characters of the different orders and pointing out some of the distinguishing features of the families, although a number of the students who haven't an especial interest in fishes have already learned the families just from seeing them again and again, and because some of the names, such as butterflies and angels, are fairly common, things they've known a long time. But we do hope to pin some of these characteristics down and we probably will be collecting a wider representative of orders than we have now. One way that you could help us, Rolf, would be to make sure that there is an additional supply of Roatnone awaiting us in Kochin because otherwise I think we're going to have great difficulty with some of the students keeping them satisfied with the fishes that we could catch in the nets.  

Another thing that I do have to add—when I said “harvest fishe” I meant pentharids.  

This is Hal Hackett. I'm a graduate student in phycology, or algalogy, whichever you please, at the Department of Botany, Duke University.
I'm a native of the state of Maine, which might account for any Down East accent you might detect. I'm here filling the position that was to be occupied by Dr. Dawson. He was unable to come. There must have been a frantic search to find someone who wasn't doing much of anything. Whatever the circumstances, here I am and very glad of it. There certainly were times when I didn't think I’d-get to Colombo before the boat sailed, even with the delays. All I really wanted to do on the way from Portland to this pearl of the East was to visit the temples of Upper Egypt.  Well, there was such confusion with my visa that I decided to stop over in Greece instead. So the plane to London had to stop in Ireland because of fog. Thus, I missed my flight to Athens by only a few days. Dublin and London are nice, but I'd packed for a warmer climate. I did finally get to Athens for awhile. But, next of interest was the flight from Greece to Egypt. I won't mention whose national airline was involved, but I doubt if I'll go back to Egypt again. It was a simple problem. Once airborne, we flew to Belgrade, not Cairo. Yugoslavia's nice, but Air Ceylon doesn't stop there. So I did get to spend some time in Egypt after all. Of course I'd missed the other plane. Pyramids are hard on folks in their Sunday suits, especially when the lights go out just as you reach the burial chamber. I emerged two hours later. Tourists are of course left to their own devices under such circumstances. I had a new suit made here in Ceylon.

As ship botanist, I might give something of the total picture of the island vegetation. Most interesting are places in the high south central mountains covered with grass and airitaceous shrubs. They're not unlike the much disputed	) (Illegible-balls?) of our own southern Appalachians.  Much of the cooler slopes are in the highest grade of tea. There seems to be five or six degrees of quality of the tea grown here. Most of these are readily obvious, but moving down a slope, apparently the quality goes down also.  In the vicinity of the old seat of the Canadian kings, the extensive mixed cultivations of rubber, tea, coffee, cacao, bamboo and cinnamon give a heavily forested look to the mountain roads.  It's indeed very beautiful. Betel is grown here also. Evidence of its use has stained the streets of Colombo red. Nearly all of the lowland, at least on the southwestern side of the island, is in yellow coconut on the higher and dryer sides.  The yellowish mud is still turned by a line of men working in perfect unison alternating the hoe from one hand to the other. The north and east portions of the island experience a long dry season. This area is in a more or less natural state of thorn scrub trees with patches of grass, mostly acacia and a large flowered (cascia just coming now into bloom.  Lantana commara is a common shrub here. In the wet lower areas, there are some plantations of teak, especially near Anarantapura.  Most of the island's beach strand has been cleared for cocos. On occasion, you can see patches though of terminalias thespesia (On 26% of tape recording) and what might be pisonia and tonafouria.  Of course the acomaya pez capri is here.  These are much smaller than the West Indian form that I'm used to, though. Super littoral and littoral zonation is not particularly distinct on the grenetic rock coast. We did select a spot in Galle in a protected region which showed a fairly distinctive black zone and a littoral red zone.  Neither of these was occupied by any microscopic algae but rock samples were taken for future study.  The sub-littoral algal situation seems to be one of a changing season, rather poor and highly empiphitized flora.  I'm surprised of the lack of such genera as dedodia and penicillis.  Halimeda is everywhere common. Pedina, cygassum, genia, antharoa, calurpa and grassalaria form the vast bulk of the total species.  The most striking member of the flora is an occasional clan of Halimenia durdali in the shallows.  Such plants were quite visible even from the top of the city wall, the shallows down at Galle.  It’s apparently nowhere very common though.  On the bottom of one of the chunks of coral brought in, I was very pleased to find just five plants of a minute asatabularia.  Well, other than that, Dr. Robertson has raided the calurpa beds for the elusive berthalinia, but to no avail.  


This is the day we sail. As usual the idle curious have gathered on the dock. The other day, events were of such interest they set up an ice cream stand.  Among the onlookers is a gentleman with leaves pasted on his face.  He’d like to sell us last week’s newspaper.  He has today’s dailies there.  

I'm Bob Wallace of Vanderbilt
University. I plan to study the vertebrates of the Indian Ocean. Of course, the mammalian life here is somewhat limited except in the areas of the larger islands, so most of my work will be done with fish and birds. So far, I've been working under Dr. Woods of Chicago in fish. We’ve done quite a bit of poisoning with Rotenone as Gary has mentioned and we've done some skindiving and spear fishing. So far, most of what we've gained here has been of a taxonomic nature. We've done some identification and noted some of the more interesting characteristics of each of these fish.  It has been very interesting to notice the ecological habits of these different species.  Some are concentrated solely in sandstone reefs, others in coral reefs, while some fish seem to inhabit all shallow waters.  The fish we will take in to deep water, of course, will be quite different from these.  Collecting procedures will be quite different also.  We plan to use trawls, nets, and lines here.  We do have one hope here and this is to collect a coelacanth and this of course will have to be done with deep water apparatus.  The coelacanths so far have been taken off the coast of Africa.  We will be in the area of Mauratius and Madagascar, and it may be possible to take one here.  We hope so.  Several of us also have been making some personal collections and we plan to send these back to our respective universities.  These will be at least representative families of the fish found in this area.  As I mentioned also, we’ll be concerned with the bird life of the area, and for collecting purposes here we have a sixteen gauge polychoke shot gun using No. 6 and 7 half shot.  These should be sufficient for most sea birds.  Dr. Woods has explained a method of taking sea birds in this respect.  This is to extract shark (?) liver, let it decay at least partially and then spread it across the water from a skiff.  Then the skiff is immediately reversed and the path retraced.  And usually here you’ll find great hordes of sea birds hovering nearby and this of course should facilitate our collecting somewhat.  Also, I plan to make, as best I can, some (not clear on tape--?) from some available nets we have here for collecting some of the smaller birds on the islands.  

The month we have been here has been an extremely interesting one, and although most of us will miss the old gentleman with leaves on his face, I for one will be very happy to get underway.  Our first stop will be the Maldive Islands which we expect to reach in a matter of a few days. The water here is expected to be clear, the fish plentiful, and we even have one description of a sunken treasure.  So, if the sharks and Maldivian fever don’t interfere, we do expect our visit there to be quite a successful one.  

This is Timmy Wilcox, one of the eight students on the ship and a graduate student at the University of Michigan. My personal interest in this trip lie in gaining a general knowledge of the invertebrate life in the Indian Ocean with particular stress on the ecological relationships.
Since I've been here, I've decided to put stress on the molluscan fauna with the rather capable aid of Dr. Robert Robertson.

I believe that the other members of the party have described rather adequately the student and professorial activities here in Ceylon and in my talk, or installment, I would prefer to describe in brief survey my journey from America to Ceylon, which took me a month and a half, and also to include several fleeting impressions of Ceylon.

On January 3rd, I left from New York City on the FRANCE, the newest and the only steamship which the French Line now operates, and for five days lived more like a vegetable than anything else, eating, sleeping, and reading on this rather plush extravagant ship. Perhaps the most enjoyable part of the trip for me was learning to dance fox-trot on a rolling and pitching dance floor. Sometimes all you had to do was maintain your balance and you looked quite graceful. I stayed a week in London and then went by train to Paris then to Munich and to Vienna. From Vienna, I flew by airplane to Istanbul from there to Beirut, then Karachi, then Bombay, and finally to Colombo.

During the trip throughout Europe, I was quite struck by the much more thorough cultural background of educated Europeans when compared to
Americans. This, I think, is no fault of Americans simply because there is far less culture available in America. There were museums, the theater, and opera everywhere la all of the European cities and the problem was to see even a small portion of the culture and art available.  

I think for me the most enjoyable thing I saw, were the Rembrandts in the national Academy of Arts in London.  One slightly different aspect of culture is the wonderful cabarets and nightclubs.  There are few things more enjoyable in my memory than dancing in the Caves in Paris, or the large dance halls in London where even respectable girls can come and not be ashamed of it, and dancing in the student hangouts in Schwabein (?) a portion of the city of Munich.  It was here that I had the closest contacts with the people in Europe, I think.  The last statement may be taken as each person sees fit.

I did have a wonderful time talking with the students and found them very enthusiastic and interesting. There were certain problems, however. For the first time in my life, I found myself dependent primarily on my knowledge for communication, not the knowledge of others. I found this somewhat exasperating but very exciting, and I thoroughly enjoyed it. 

One of the more enjoyable parts of the trip was eating the various foods in each different city. I found London's food to be such like those in the United States. However, in France and Germany, the excellent cooking and imaginative flavoring made mealtime a high spot during the day. I had great fun sampling the various pastries along the streets in the shop windows and in the restaurants. I must say I was less enthusiastic about the curries which we now sometimes eat in Ceylon and which I ate for a week in Bombay. 

The most interesting things for me in Istanbul and Beirut were the strange street bazaars where you find everything from peanuts to elephants sold and where the unbelievable melee of people, colors, smells, and sights of all sorts staggers your senses. My most graphic memories of Bombay and Colombo will always be the thousands of people, the beggars sleeping in their own filth on the sidewalks during both day and night. When I first saw these people, it seemed to be that they possessed a certain kind of pride, but now after I have seen them for a longer time, it seems to me that this pride takes the form, instead, of a desperate and despairing hope for the future.  I say this because there seems to be little hope for them in the present.  

I also ought to mention the tremendous impact which the death of President Kennedy had on the whole world, at least the world that I've seen during the last month or two. People from all walks of life, beggars, taxi cab drivers, officials of various sorts--all these lamented from their hearts the death of this man. President Kennedy was sincerely loved and respected in all of these countries. In fact, I'm ashamed to admit it, but I now believe that John Kennedy was more appreciated outside of his own country than within.

I've been here in Ceylon now just over a month, and I find it a completely beautiful country. I appreciate as much as anything the amazing childlike quality of many of the country people and also the down-to-earth common sense of others, especially those in the cities, for here there is a greater percentage of educated people. I like the Ceylonese very much, and I think that our delay here has been fully to our advantage for it is only by being here this length of time that we have been able to appreciate, to come to comprehend, the way of life of these people.

The parts of Ceylon which we've seen have been rimmed with dazzling white sand beaches, the organic outrigger canoes lying on them, and there we
See too often the continual struggle of poor fishermen who toil so hard to catch fish and the results of their labor fleece the pockets of the middlemen who sell the fish in the market with a little shouting. In the inland regions, we saw many lumber yards where men saw large planks of lumber by hand. And we also saw extensive rice paddies, tea plantations,
And coconut plantations, although most of the more humid parts of the island possess coconut trees everywhere, whether they are on plantations or not.

We find the economic conditions of Ceylon to be completely appalling, at least on American standards.  Here, at least for tourists the black market appears to be much more common than the official channels and especially for the people in the cities.  Honesty too frequently means poverty and empty stomachs.  


During the second week no of our stay here the student complement on the ship made a trip through the southwestern portion of Ceylon passing through the cities then down through Kandy and back to Colombo.  I think it was here that, for the first time, in my life, I felt the impact of an ancient civilization on the present time.  For, in this region, there once flourished a civilization which apparently more than rivaled that of the Aztecs.  This is the ancient Senalese culture which began apparently around 400 B.C. and which died about eight hundred years ago.  I gave me a strange feeling to see the jungle growing everywhere around these cities, and to know that once this was a wealthy and cultivated land.  Between Anarantapura and Sigeria there are sixty miles of jungle.  I was told by one person that at one time a person was able to walk from rooftop to rooftop between these two points.  The ludicrous comparison to this now is merely from treetop to treetop.  The only remnants which now remain of the Senalese culture are the jungle grown monuments which very strongly bespeak the once magnificent culture.  Somehow the ancient temples cry out aloud of their past.  This feeling never left me on the trip, and it made me wonder how the down ridden conditions of much of Ceylon today could have come about after such a glorious history.  I guess the story of the Roman Empire gives us the answer.  

I shall be very sorry to leave Ceylon.  I feel as if I’m just beginning to understand its people.  On the other hand, we all look toward the Maldive Islands with a wistful longing, and it looks as if we finally may sail for them.  

This is Karl Mauzey of the University of Washington.  Since leaving the United States at the end of January, one and a half months ago, I been to many plates, seen many things from picturesque to grotesque, and have been interested in it all. Sometimes as a tourist, sometimes as a customer and most of the point of the trip, sometimes as a student, the Orient has provided many thrilling, profitable, and useful experiences.  

My flight to Colombo originated in Seattle, with stops in San Francisco,
Honolulu, Tokyo, Hong Kong, Bangkok and Singapore, a very brief, but fascinating glimpse of the mysterious Orient. The East now seems less mysterious, but I even more hope to spend more time in some of the places I saw only too quickly. 

In Tokyo, I spent most of my time shopping for cameras. I got some good buys, for example a Nikon F with fl4 lens for $145. I hope to see the rest of Japan eventually.

I also did a lot of window shopping in Hong Kong, a city of fascinating shops filled with bargains. My wallet is happy I was resistant to most of the bargains, but I'm not. Like most male tourists in Hong Kong, I bought a tailor-made suit. They made it in a day and a half for $35. It's the first suit that really fits me.

Bangkok I remember as a city of magnificent Buddhist temples, saclin -clad monks, big open-air markets selling food, pets, clothes, everything under the sun, and full of some of the most friendly and polite people I have ever met. Bangkok is a city I must get back to.

By the time I reached Singapore, the tourist in me was close to satiated.
I saw no temples, avoided the Tiger Gardens and spent all too much time in the comfort of my air-conditioned hotel. This was only my third or fourth day in the the tropics and after a few hours in the open, I became extremely pooped. I did take a boat trip to the harbor and investigated fish traps supported on poles in the Indian Ocean. The previous night I had had my first collecting trip—a short visit to a rather barren beach next to a suburb of Singapore. Some weathered algae, anthropods, and a few small snails were all I found. Even though it was night and almost high tide, it was very exciting to wade in the Indian Ocean.

I met Mary Rice in Singapore and we proceeded to Colombo together. The first night here was absolute hell, as we foolishly decided to move directly onto the ship. Things must be done more slowly in the tropics. The next day would have been much easier. 

The last month I have explored Ceylon from the old capital of Anarantapura, a city of three million inhabitants twenty-five hundred years ago, to the first station of Cruise Bravo on the reefs of Galle.  

The highlights of our Ceylon sojourn have mostly been covered by my fellow students, but I would like to add a word or two about a place several of us visited in the first week. Seven miles out of the main center of Colombo in the suburb of Dediwalla, the government maintains the most beautiful zoo I have ever seen. It is not the largest, but there is a very large selection of beasts from the Orient and Africa and including some from North America. The landscaping is magnificent.  I do not know all of the vegetation, but the effect is breathtaking.
Brightly colored flowers, broad-leaved trees, all the luxuriance of the tropics--and the animals are displayed in very neat, clean, and appropriate quarters. The undulates have large enclosures to wander in; there is a large pond maturing many water birds, storks, cormorants, swans, ducks, etc. And of course, there are elephants.  I had my (something & blanked out here on the tape) to prove it.  Those of us who weren’t riders also participated by photographic more adventurous students.  After the ride, we watched the elephant dance. They had about seven pachyderms lumbering about, not very gracefully, but well worth the visit. They also did tricks, like lifting a keeper up by the head. I applauded that, but not for the elephant. One of the more colorful aspects was the rest of the audience. About one-half wore saris, all in many, many glorious colors. All in all, Dediwalla zoo was one of the most interesting visits of my Ceylon trip.  

I am Hans Guttinger from Switzerland.  

Yesterday, the officers, the crew, and the scientific staff held an open house for the representatives of Ceylonese science and for our interested friends.  Therefore, some of the students have had the pleasure to bring the invitation for the open house of our good Te Vega by taxis to different persons.

I and Mary had to bring the invitation to the well-known, now retired zoologist Dr. Paul Daraneeyagalla.  A servant received us and let us in a large room.  Through the open window we enjoyed a look in the garden where a lot of tropic flowers were in full bloom.  Even I could observe some beautiful three-colored parrots.  This place reminds us rather of a beautiful room at the British Museum than of the working place of a modern naturalist. Dr. Paul Daraneeyagalla welcomed us warmly and told us about his beautiful time as a student at Harvard University and about his very fertile scientific work. He had not only worked on the ancestors of elephants, lions, and Homo sapiens, but also on systematics and biology of reptiles and fishes and besides he is very keen on painting and sculpturing.  We were deeply impressed by his humanity and that it is possible to work so successfully in so different fields.  After some cups of tea, we said good-bye to this most interesting person.

I enjoy this cruise.  I will take profit from this cruise for my whole future.  I am very glad to be here.  


This is Mary E. Rice, a graduate student at the University of Washington in Seattle.  My field of interest is developmental biology of marine invertebrates, particularly of the group Cypunculitta.  

As a student on Cruise Bravo, I would like to describe briefly for you our first class project at Galle, Ceylon. Here, at Station No. l of this expedition, the students cooperated in a transect study of the fringing coral reef which extends along the southern shores of the island of Ceylon. This was the first opportunity for many of the students to observe a living coral reef. Much interest and enthusiasm was displayed as this new and exciting community was revealed to us. The area we chose for the study was located at Triton Bastion of the Old Dutch fortification in Galle. Here our transect was laid out, extending from the walls of the fort through a shallow lagoon no deeper than three and one-half feet, out to the edge of the reef, a total distance of seventy-seven meters. It was our intention to extend the transect over the edge of the reef, but the strong surf and current proved too dangerous for our divers to negotiate. Thus, our study was terminated at the edge of the breakers. The lagoon between the shore and the reef, was under the influence of some current and here we found coral rubble which had been colonized by a variety of flora and fauna. Most abundant were the alga, Halimeda, and what were probably two different species of phylanthis.  The zoanthis formed colorful patches, varying from light browns to bright emerald greens and robin's egg blues.  Several holoferians were found in the sand with the rubble. The most common was the black cucumber Holoferia atra, and the most spectacular was a species of Uacta, a mottled black and brown cynapthid cucumber which was extensible to a length of more than two feet and moved in a rising serpentine fashion. The natives warned us not to touch these animals and we soon discovered the basis for their fear. The numerous, tiny, opticles(?) or stipules of the cucumber adhere to one’s skin on contact, resulting in a definite pricking sensation—unpleasant, but not particularly painful. Here in the lagoon there were also to be found large colonies of soft coral, brown, yellow, and green, reaching at times the diameter of several meters. As we approached the edge of the reef, we found increasing numbers of hard corals forming a solid and continuous mass.  We marveled at their variety of form and intricate beauty.  There were a profusion of stabhorns (?), corals, and more rounded and flattened grained corals, each with its own associated fauna dwelling within the protected crevices and caverns of coral. At the edge of the reef, where the heavy surf continually washes, there were well worn coral olders (?), apparently lifeless. When broken open, however, with a pick or hammer, one discovered a fascinating community

--END OF TAPE 2
