TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT 5

We reached Rabaul late on September 12th and had to wait at anchor until the moaning of the 13th for clearance by the medical, custom and Immigration authorities. A couple of members of our faculty had friends, or friends of friends in New Britain, and some of the people whom we had met briefly on Bougainville had preceded us by air to Rabaul, so that when we could get ashore we were not dependent on strangers but received a cordial welcome with familiar faces to back it up. In addition, the interest in our "beautiful ship" was such that the students, always effective ambassadors, soon established good relations with the hospitable townspeople and were deluged with invitations to teas, to trips into the countryside, to dinners. A courtesy call on the Resident Commissioner, the complex struggle to get airplane reservations for our departing members straightened out, the routine business of checking mail and getting supplies on board, and other necessary odds and ends had to be sandwiched in between other more interesting activities, such as a diving expedition to still another coral reef, a climb, under the guidance of the local government vulcanologist, of Matupi, the still active volcano bordering the 7th fairway of the Rabaul Golf Club, together with a descent into the crater, or a trip to the Government Agricultural Experiment Station at Keravat, 25 miles across the Gazelle Peninsula.

Let it be here recorded that I remembered my vow not to go volcano hunting, and Instead of climbing Matupi I stayed on board for an appointment with the press.

The trip to Keravat permitted us to learn something of the biological control of insect pests and Japanese snails, and to see the experiments in clonal selection, plant spacing, balance of shade and fertilizer, etc., that is doing so much to increase the yield of cocoa, and the instruction was interspaced by pleasant interludes of conversation during which Dr. and Mrs. Gordon Dunn plied us with delicious red-hot curry or cooling drinks. However, I am sure that the things that most of us will remember longest will not be the specific things that we go to see on such trips, but the fantastic kaleidoscope of impressions that assault us on every hand and merge into a vivid impression of these fascinating islands—the dazzling white stretches of beach, the perfect cones of recent volcanoes and the jagged mountains that are the eroded remnants of old ones, the green sky-rocket bursts of the coconut palms against the bright blue cloud-cluttered sky, the dense grassless shade In the cocoa groves and the blast of light and heat that strikes like a blow when one steps out into the sun, the tangle of aerial roots reaching down from the limbs of the banyan trees, the philodendrons climbing the tallest trunks and competing with the epiphytic ferns and orchids for light, the parrots with their quick-winging flight, the hornbills with their slow swishing
beat, the flying foxes (fruit bats with a wing spread of up to 3 feet) fluttering in the dusk, the neat thatch-roofed mat-walled houses, the dugout outriggered canoes, the dark-skinned people in their bright lava-lavas with tattooed faces and colorful flowers or shiny leaves or bits of tin foil stuck in their hair as an expression of the their joy of life, the bright red lips and black teeth that reveal an addiction to beetlenut chewing, the high-piled cumulus clouds, sometimes white and cottony, sometimes dark and threatening, the sudden descent of rain in torrents and the equally sudden clearing--these are the different, picturesque and strange things that hammer on our eyes to create an impression and vivid memories that I am sure we shall treasure for the rest cf our lives.

In spite of its color and interest, Rabaul was a place of sad parting. Before dawn on Sunday morning, September 15th, Dr. Thompson, Bobbie McLean and Tom Clarke flew out on the first leg of their trip home to take up again their routine duties in the United States. Dick Mariscal, Dave Milne, Mike Nesson and Don Thompson were unable to get reservations until Wednesday, but they were all assured of an interesting wait for their plane as houseguests of hospitable families in town. These four, their hosts and hostesses, and many others both European and native, were on hand as we sailed out on Sunday evening to wave farewell and to wish us luck on our continuing voyage.

Rounding the northern tip of New Britain, we turned westward and set a course for Kotabaru. In these tropical waters, the sea is flat and calm, there is little or no wind, and we are tired of slack sails and the throbbing of the main engine. Our depleted company makes TE VEGA seem almost like a ghost ship, and the previous bustling activity everywhere is replaced by single lonely individuals here and there, going about their duties or taking their ease. There are now only four students and two faculty members on board, the equatorial heat and humidity is oppressive and the pace has slackened.

On the afternoon of Monday, September 16th, there came a pleasant diversion. Miss Bennett, who, due to the reduced number of the scientific group, was holding down the biological watch, spotted a strange object about four miles away. We decided to run over and have a look at what appeared to be a very small island far from where any island was supposed to be and a hundred miles from the closest land mass. As soon as it was evident that what we saw was a thicket of bamboo, we named it "Isobel Bennett Bamboo Island." However, I fear that it will never be recorded in any atlas, because it was afloat. Somewhat more than fifty stalks extended some twenty feet straight up out of the water, and as we drew alongside, we could see that they also extended down about twenty-five feet under the surface to a ball of roots and earth about ten or twelve feet in diameter. Circling around and among the stalks were a number of fishes and when hook and line got no results, we tried a bit of poison. Although we got a small sample, our catch was slim because most of the fishes sank and we were discouraged from diving for them by the presence of sharks. We had sharks on the fishing line twice, but did not succeed in landing one. There were a few small barnacles on the bamboo stalks below the water surface and numerous tiny ants above it, so here was another example of faunal transport of both terrestrial and marine forms by drifting material, this time a "floating island." Its fauna was meager, but the plankton was rich in the surrounding water. A five-minute tow with the half-meter plankton net yielded a multitude of radiolarians, blue copepods, ctenophores, etc. The beautiful Venus girdle (Cestum), a transparent ribbon-like ctenophore with iridescent pink marginal combs was common, some of the specimens two feet or more in length. Unfortunately, they are extremely fragile and disintegrated entirely when we tried narcotization. Nevertheless, it was a beautiful and interesting form to see, and one that most biologists know only from the figures in books.

Since we were behind schedule, we kept pushing on as fast as possible, collecting no new data nor specimens beyond those gained during cur routine bathythermograph casts. There were a fair number of logs and other items of debris floating in the water, but quick examination of a number of these showed that they were barren and without marine growths on them; they had probably come from the streams of northern New Guinea where the wet season is in progress, and they had been in the water for only a short time.

On the morning of September 19th, we were off Humboldt Bay and working in toward Kotabaru (Hollandia of World War II fame). The land looked dark and grim under black clouds, but as we approached through intermittant showers, the grey-black turned to green, and neat blocks of houses could be seen on the heights. As we rounded Soeadja Point, the entire town came into view, complete with native houses on stilts over the water, and soon we were tied up at the modem wharf.

It was long after noon before the formalities of entry were completed and we were free to go ashore. Since our call at Kotabaru was for the sole purpose of taking two Indonesian scientists on board, I was a bit disturbed by the fact that they did not make their appearance, and more so by the fact that none of the officials who hoarded us knew anything at all about them. However, Lieutenant S. Puguh, of the Indonesian Navy, offered to drive me to the office of the Vice Governor, Colonel R. Pamudji. There I learned that the scientists were expected, but that the time of their arrival was indefinite. Later, when Col. Pamudji visited and inspected the ship at my invitation, I learned that he had spent some time at the U. S. Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, and it was pleasant to discuss with him the Monterey Peninsula, which he knew very well.

Lt. Puguh offered us transportation in his jeep, and when I said that I should like to visit the university that someone had mentioned, he said that he would return at 5:00. Evidently as a concession to the afternoon heat, practically all activity stops at noon and is resumed again at 5:00. After a pleasant ride through some of the spectacular lush green scenery to which we have become accustomed, we arrived at the Universitas Negeri Tjenderwasih, to be very cordially received by the Rektor, Prof. R. Soegarda Poerbakawatja. The University has just been established in new and modern buildings in a pleasant setting about fifteen miles from Kotabaru. It has, at present, Faculties of Law, Education and Anthropology, but the other sciences are not yet represented. We were entertained by the freshman class, in green mortar boards, who presented a program of Indonesian songs and dances. Miss Bennett and I were even induced to join in one dance, which we called the "Indonesian twist," but I fear that among that group of supple young people we contributed little in the way of grace. Amway, it was an interesting and pleasant evening.

Since we are so far behind schedule and were impatient to be on our way, we did not dare to stray far from the ship lest our guests should arrive. Therefore, we had to content ourselves with collecting a few odd specimens of medusae, sea urchins and fishes from the wharf. The sea urchins, with very long and slender spines that waved about with remarkable agility, represented two species of the genus Diadema. In both, the body was black, but one was marked by a few small pearly white spots and had a ring of golden yellow around the anus located on top of the test; the other was covered by a sparse tracery of iridescent blue lines so intense that they appeared to be luminous. Both were beautiful, but we handled them with care - since they have nasty reputations.

Shortly after noon, our guests appeared, escorted by Col. Pamudji and Prof. Poerbakawatja. They were Mr. Kesijan Rominohtarto, a carcinologist who has done some work in collaboration with my friend Dr. R. Serene and has had sea experience on the Naga Expedition in the South China Sea, and Mr. Djoko Prawoto, a young man just entering the field of planktonology.

By 1430 hours, our papers were in order, and we were under way once more over almost flat-calm seas with the main engine doing the work of the wind. Soon we had a visit from an old friend from California who came on board by way of the trolling line, a thirty pound yellow-fin tuna (Neothunnus macropterus), our lone sample from a very large school. She was a bit too large for convenient preservation, but she made an excellent dinner for all on board, and we found out from her stomach contents that she had been feeding on or near the bottom in shallow water. Whereas most tuna specimens show only ono or two species in their stomachs at one time, this one contained two species of squids and at least six species of shallow-water fishes. The following day, Saturday, September 21st, we took a small barracuda (Sphyraena picuda) a little over two feet long. This one went to science instead of to the galley and, as a dividend, yielded a few fish lice (argulids).

On September 22nd, we crossed the equator once more and passed from Spring into Fall. This time the imaginary line was clearly visible, for a current rip had established a long line of foam bubbles extending almost due east and west. Me cruised along it for a period, but saw no evidence of any accumulation of organisms, as I had hoped we would.

Although we are hurrying westward as fast as possible, lack of material to keep us busy made it necessary to stop for a little plankton collecting. The half-meter net towed on the surface produced a catch very heavy in diatoms, with prosobranch veligers, copepods and a few isopods, amphipods, heteropod and pteropod molluscs and siphonophores mixed in. We also tried to put the one meter net into a very well defined deep scattering layer at about 330 meters, but evidently did not quite reach it, since the catch was not rich. It too had numerous veligers and copepods, some pteropods and heteropods, a few fish larvae and some salps. The nicest organisms to watch were a couple of the grotesque amphipods, Phronima sedentaria, living in transparent barrel-like houses that they have chewed out of salp tests (the tunicin coats of pelagic sea squirts). The biggest one had a large family of infants arranged in a perfect wide belt around the equator of her barrel. However, the most interesting organisms were several small worm-like creatures that presented a lot of trouble in our attempts to classify them. Finally, Mike Hadfield, the most competent mollusc man on board, came to the conclusion that they must be aplacophorans. If this is true (and we have no one who can make a better judgement) it is most interesting since, to the best of our knowledge, no pelagic Aplacophora are known. With the bottom about 4400 meters below our net, there can be no doubt that these were pelagic.

That night, we cruised for a time through a concentration of pyrosomes, and every one stayed on deck to watch the sudden bursts of pale green light that they produced when disturbed by the shock wave of the passing ship, and then their fading with time and distance as they passed astern.

On September 23rd, we encountered an area sprinkled with drifting pieces of wood and bamboo. We stopped long enough to pick up a couple of pieces and sample their fauna, consisting largely of the goose-neck barnacle Lepas anserifera, with a few individuals of another species of the same genus that we could not determine, mixed in. There were also some crabs aboard (probably Paohygrapsus marinus), the very large annelid. Amphinome rostrate which is found only on drifting material, and a couple of other small annelids of the family Serpulidae. Each small stick provided a focus for a surprisingly large group of fishes ranging up to about eight or ten inches in length; a piece of bamboo four feet long and two inches in diameter might be sheltering a dozen or more. They appeared to be largely carangids and balistids, but they were too fast to be caught in the open water despite all our vigorous gymnastic antics with the dip nets.

We awoke on the morning of September 24th to find that TE VEGA bad a marked list to starboard, and to feel life in the old ship once more. We were under sail! The flat calm of the last several days had been relieved by a breeze from the south and, although the main engine was still doing most of the work, we appreciated the assistance of the wind. It is remarkable how great an effect a little moving air can have on the psychology of people aboard a sailing vessel.

Teluk Kau is a great bay extending southwestward from the northeast corner of Halmahera for about seventy miles and missing by only a couple of miles cutting the island in two. It was the inner part of this bay that was our goal, since it is marked by a deep depression which is separated from the open sea by a shallow sill half-way up the bay. This situation looked intriguing, and we figured that the deep water in the inner basin would be stagnant like those of the Black Sea and some of the Norwegian fjords. At any rate, it seemed well worth looking into. Hurrying as much as we could, we found that we could not pass the narrows by daylight, and one does not tackle such waters at night in this part of the world where navigational aids such as lighthouses are conspicuous by their absence. In fact, the sun was down before we reached our selected anchorage, and the pale quarter moon was obliterated by a sudden downpour at just the wrong time. Sneaking in slowly, seeking the bottom, we discovered that our two echo sounders had developed a disconcerting disagreement. The Sim-rad deep-sea research instrument in the radio shack was tracing a fine bottom at about 230 meters, while the Kelvin Hughes navigational sounder near the wheel showed only about 45 fathoms. We switched them off alternately to see if one could be picking up a false return from the other, but this was not the case. The only thing to do was to put out the anchor at the end of a shot of chain and to ooze our way in, feeling for the bottom fifteen fathoms down as we went. Long before the anchor touched, the navigational instrument showed that we were high and dry on a reef, but then it began to behave once more and showed an entirely new and perfect trace that agreed with that of the Simrad. I know now why Captain Olsen's hair is white.

We have both recently finished reading Brett Holder's "Navigator in the South Sea," which is crowded with vessels on the uncharted reef of this poorly surveyed area, and I urging the Captain to write a similar book including a chapter entitled, "The Night the Fathometer Got Drunk."

As soon as we felt secure, lights were put out over the water and the dip nets manned for a fine session of night lighting. Swarms of zoea were taken, together with young clupeids, lots of atherinids, a number of flying fishes, a couple of good sized mullets, and such oddments as a leptocephalus, a pipe fish, a few cubomedusae, some stomatopod larvae, a small octopus, etc. On two occasions, schools of lantern fishes (genus Diaphus) appeared. They were easily recognized in the water since, curiously enough, their backs looked reddish brown under the light, while practically all of the other fishes appeared bluish or greyish. When we caught them in the nets their ventral surfaces emitted a bright blue luminescence that was much admired by all. Our catch included two species of sea snakes, the first ones taken on the trip, although we had already seen some. I discovered that some of the ship's company did not appreciate these reptiles as much as they did other animals, although some species are beautifully marked in bold patterns of yellow and black. Perhaps it is because they are fairly closely related to the cobras and are just as venomous, although the fact that they are more docile must be counted in their favor.

September 25th was a day when we fervently wished that we had our departed students back, for we were short of manpower for the job we had to do. It began with a haul using the six-foot beam trawl on the sill in the narrows where the water was between twenty-five and thirty fathoms deep. As soon as the trawl deposited its rich haul on deck, we occupied a shallow hydrographic station, and then everyone was busy with water chemistry or picking specimens out of the mud from the trawl haul, as we sailed for the inner basin. These tasks were not finished before we had to make another hydrographic cast to 450 meters in the deepest part of the inner bay, and then do still more chemistry while shooting the trawl once more for a deep haul. Unfortunately, the gear fouled on this attempt, and thus we were saved from the prospect of working all night on the deep catch. Time did not permit another try, and we had just time enough to run in for anchorage in the rapidly falling darkness of the tropics. Night lighting was rather unproductive because everyone was too pooped from the activities of the day and we were also visited by a group of people from the neighboring village. Communication with them would have been rather difficult if we had not had our friends from Djakarta to interpret for us.

In the morning of September 26th, we repeated the trawl haul that we had muffed the previous day. We brought up a mass of decaying vegetable debris, water-logged wood, leaves, coconut fragments, ether nuts of various kinds, segments of palm fronds, but animals were conspicuous by their absence. Two large portunid crabs, probably caught on the way up, and several fair-sized stomatopods constituted the entire catch.

As soon as the haul was up, we ran for Kau, the main village on the bay, in order to pay our respects to the Chief and to get his permission to run a poison station on one of the adjacent coral reefs. Even before we landed, the eastward set of the small boats in which we went ashore convinced us that a reef station would be impossible; the tidal current running out of the bay, and enforced by a brisk wind, was far too strong to make such a project feasible. However, two bombed Japanese ships, resting on the bottom about a half mile off shore with their decks awash, looked as if their holds might provide the quieter water that we needed.

Kau surprised us by its size. Instead of being a collection of a few huts scattered at random, it was marked out in blocks with well defined streets at right angles to each other. There must have been several thousand people living there. Our arrival was evidently a big event, because a large crowd of people met us on the beach and a great and ever-growing mob of children surrounded us like a swarm of mosquitoes on our parade of several blocks to meet the Chief and then back to the boats again.

Our proposed poisoning in one of the sunken gained approval from the village dignitaries, but told that some of them would accompany us. The Chief, the Deputy Chief and four other men came along to see what we would do. As it turned out, the station was not too successful since the holds, with their overgrowth of barnacles and sharp bivalve molluscs, and the long-spined sea urchins (Diadema) clinging to the bulkheads, were not designed for easy climbing in and out, while the light below deck was not adequate for effective diving and, finally, evidently many of the groggy fishes swam or drifted into totally inaccessible parts of the ship. However, we did get a fair number of species, including a nice remora (we never did see the shark to which he was probably attached) and a large spectacular angel fish (family Pomacanthidae), golden brown in color with markings of brilliant blue lines. We also took a good sample of the invertebrate fauna.

At the crack of dawn on the 27th, we set out to take a station outside of the sill to be comparable to the one we had taken in the inside bay. When the fathometer showed 455 meters, the same depth that we had sampled inside, we made our hydrographic cast. During the time that this required, we had drifted into 525 meters. Since the chart showed only very widely scattered soundings we shot the trawl anyway and headed for the southern shore where indications of shallower water seemed best.  However, the bottom continued to deepen gradually to 570 meters and our haul averaged almost twenty per cent deeper than the one of the previous day. The bottom was evidently fine green mud without a trace of plant debris, and with a relatively rich fauna of shrimps, prawns and fishes and, best of all, pogonophorans. It was a delight to take many specimens of at least two species of this recently defined phylum which few zoologists have ever seen, let alone collected. As a dividend, we also took a number of pelagic organisms evidently collected on the way up or down—a jellyfish, a big sea cucumber of the genus Bathyplotes and a number of smaller ones belonging to Pelagothuria or related genera, a large but fragile squid unfortunately in two pieces) with luminous organs on its eyeballs, and a couple of bathypelagic fishes (Nemichthys and Cyclcthone).

In addition the striking differences in the bottom deposits and faunas at the inside and outside stations, we found the hydrographic features to be markedly divergent. For example, outride there was a temperature difference of almost 18ₒC. from top to bottom, while inside it was less than 1ₒ; the inside station showed a curious oxygen curve with a minimum at about one hundred meters and a marked increase to 450 meters; the phosphate and silicate curves showed reversed trends below about a hundred meters at the two stations. These are features that need a bit of mental digestion on our part, and nowhere else have I been so upset by the necessity for hurrying on. The problems of Teluk Kau could have engaged our attention for months, and two or three weeks would have been the minimum time required to get any decent sort of understanding about what is going on in the bay.

As soon as the last trawl haul was up from Teluk Kau, we scampered for Celebes and arrived at Menado just at dusk on Saturday, September 28th. On Sunday morning we said farewell to our two Indonesian friends who had been most pleasant and helpful colleagues during their visit. They and Captain Olsen, with the blessing of the harbor police, took a small boat ashore to see what could be done about clearance, since we had to pu3h on to Zamboanga in order to get our students back to the U.S. in time for their autumn terms. It proved to be an all-day job, and the rest of us who were not permitted ashore waited on board, tried fishing with hook and line but caught nothing, examined the waterfront of Menado through field glasses, and exchanged pleasantries with the swarm of natives who came out to see us in outriggers, inner tubes, or simply by swimming about half a mile. When the Captain returned at about six o'clock, hot and exhausted from a full day trying to track down the necessary officials, we hauled up the anchor and left in the gathering dusk for the two-day run across the Celebes Sea to the Philippines.

Just before sunset on October 1st we arrived at Zamboanga. Even though it was well after office hours, and in spite of the six-knot current running through Basilan Strait which gave us a rather impressive bow wave even at anchor, the port authorities came out and cleared us for entry, so those who wanted to could go ashore that evening.

Everyone in Zamboanga from Dr. Thomas F. Ferrer, the Mayor, and other officials we encountered, to the private citizens we happened to meet, went out of their way to show us every courtesy and consideration. Again we were deluged with invitations of all kinds. My own time was almost entirely occupied with various people from the Fisheries Office and the Department of Agriculture, visiting their establishments and entertaining them on board the ship. However, there was time for me to take a quick trip around town, to visit the market, and to see a little of the environs in a jeep provided by the Fisheries Office and under the expert guidance of Mr. Caparoz of their staff. I was quite captivated. Nowhere have I seen such a riot of bougainvillia in bloom; the road leading to the fine city park was a blaze of color in all shades from magenta through red and copper to pale pink and even white. There were other flowers too, hibiscus and orchids and numerous kinds that I cannot name. No wonder that Zamboanga is known as "The City of Flowers." Its title is well earned.

Our main purpose in stopping at Zamboanga was to disembark three of our remaining students, Mary Ann Jordan, Mike Hadfield and Paul Schroeder. We were sorry to lose them and sorry to have to leave the hospitable city and interesting area of which we had only a tantalizing glimpse, but once more we had to push on and mark in our memories still another place to which we would like to return. At about 0300 in the dark morning hours of October 3rd, we hoisted anchor and headed westward across the Sulu Sea.

With only a single student, Joan Gerdts, left on board, and the pressing need to get to Singapore and prepare for the arrival of the next group of students and investigators, scientific work virtually came to a halt. However, it was impossible not to try to collect at least something, so on October 5th, off the north coast of Borneo, we shot the beam trawl in a depth of one hundred meters and were rewarded by a good catch of large hydroids, alcyonarians, bryozoans, worms, crustaceans, echinoderms, fishes, molluscs, etc. from a bottom of fine grey mud. Similarly on the 7th, we stopped long enough to investigate a drifting barnacle-covered log. However, tomorrow, October 9th, we shall arrive in Singapore, and it is time to briefly take stock of the first cruise of TE VEGA.

Our Pacific crossing started in the worst possible way. Our departure was delayed practically a month, the ship was still a shambles from yard work, and morale was at a low ebb, due to interminable waiting -- for things to get done that never seemed to be completed, and for promises to be fulfilled that never were. There had been no time for the shakedown cruise that had been planned, so the voyage itself became a shakedown. We set up and rearranged our laboratories, hunted out missing equipment and improvised when we could not find some of it, tried out the various types of gear, made mistakes and corrected them as best we could, and modified our schedule as we went along.

The end of the voyage was not satisfactory either, with the scientific personnel dwindling at Suva, at Rabaul and at Zamboanga as our delayed schedule made it necessary for more cud more people to depart in order to meet previous commitments in the United States. The most fruitful segment was the passage between Suva and Rabaul, when we were set up to do our work, knowledgeable about our tasks, still with enough students on board to carry out a full program without undue strain, and in a rich and fascinating region that simply clamored for investigation.

As I have stated and reiterated before, the necessity of pushing on to cover ten thousand miles so that we could pick up the next group at Singapore in time to give them a reasonably full cruise, was a continuous source of exasperation. Time after time, it robbed us of the opportunity to stop and really investigate fascinating problems that presented themselves.

Nevertheless, in spite of our troubles and difficulties, I think the cruise accomplished its purposes. Although there was some friction of personalities, this never presented a serious problem, and the group worked together in harmony. We occupied twelve hydrographic stations strategically placed, and sixty-one biological stations as opportunity permitted. We are sending home both data and specimens for further study by the students or by other specialists. Twelve graduate students, three faculty members, and a number of the crew as well, have, through lectures, laboratory and field work, gained an intimate knowledge of the oceans, their inhabitants, and some of the techniques for investigating them that could not have been gained in any other way. I believe that each of these will give many others the same experiences vicariously, that each returning TE VEGA Expedition member will serve as a pebble dropped in the American intellectual pond to generate ripples of interest in, and understanding of, the oceans among their colleagues and future students.

To my mind, this cruise, although it fell far short of accomplishing everything that I had hoped, was a success. With experience behind us, a functioning ship to start with, less territory to cover and consequently more time to spend in a few places, the next cruise should be much better.
