TE VEGA EXPEDITION
GENERAL NARRATIVE--INSTALLMENT – 6

Singapore is a big city, a cosmopolitan city, a jumbled mixture of East and West. Modern business buildings, apartment houses and hotels occur cheek by jowl with cluttered, untidy, odoriferous streets teeming with Chinese, Hindus, and Malays. A Church of England cathedral stands almost within a stone's throw of a Moslem mosque; good universities with modern facilities and equipment contrast with the slowly moldering Raffles Museum; the fine Botanical Garden features bands of monkeys running loose and begging or stealing peanuts from delighted tourists; the Van Cleef Aquarium, with its exotic local fishes, is well worth a visit; the squalid muddy river is choked with sampans, each with a pair of eyes painted on the prow so that they can see where they are going. The people are just as varied and interesting: Indian money changers in white khurtas every ten feet along Collyer Quay; Eleanor Gann and Beau Fisher from home, the Moirs, whom we met in Honolulu, and the McKillops, whom we met in Kieta on the Pacific crossing, Hermon Slade from Sydney, all old friends here for the World Orchid Conference and proving the world is a small place after all; the bearded and turbaned Sikhs, who seem to have a monopoly on doorman's and guard's jobs; Roland Sharma, Lecturer at Singapore University, and Prof. Li Ming-Liang, of Nanyang University, who each brought groups of students on board; the Chinese trishaw men with bulge-muscled calves who have replaced the rickshaw pullers; Johnson, the artist who was passing through Singapore some twenty years ago and forgot to leave, is an ardent skin diver and knows all the best places to collect shells; Mr. Espey, local manager for the American President Lines, who was a most charming host as he entertained some of us at dinner in his beautiful home. These and many more helped to make our stay memorable.

But our stay in Singapore was not a vacation and a sight-seeing session. The end of one cruise and the start of the next involves work and attention to endless detail. We were all busy getting the ship in order for the next three months. The engine room, in particular, needed work, and the motors were disassembled, inspected and put together again; the proud symbol IIOE (International Indian Ocean Expedition) was painted on the sides of the wet lab; supplies and equipment were purchased and installed. Numerous trips to the American Consulate General, and letters and cables to Thailand, India and Indonesia were necessary before we could learn exactly where we could and could not work (unfortunately the Nicobar and Andaman Islands finally turned out to be off limits). Conferences with the Master Attendant (the man in charge of all marine activities) kept us informed of the latest news on the piracy situation in the Strait of Malacca and allowed us to plot a course through reasonably safe waters. The new scientists were welcomed, assigned to quarters, their gear stowed, they were briefed on the ship's rules and problems, and were started on collecting while we were still at anchor. A police permit had to be secured to get Frank Gill's shotguns and ammunition through customs, and a police escort arranged to get them on board ship. There was plenty to do, and only occasionally did we have time for a cool drink at the Raffles Hotel in salute to the city, while waiting for the launch to take us back to the ship anchored in the outer roads.

Fifteen days in port is a longtime, and in spite of collecting at Kampong Layang, Sekudu Island in Johore Strait, East St. John's Island, Keppel Harbor, Pulo Hantu and Pulo Tekukor, we were all anxious to get moving. Finally, on Friday, October 25th we hauled in the hook and headed through Singapore Strait for the Strait of Malacca. By daylight of the 26th we were off the town of Malacca and soon anchored between two small islands, Pulo Anyut and Pulo Besar. The scientists split into two groups, one going to each of the islands to investigate the shallow waters. Collecting was not very good; surf on the outer Pulo Anyut and silt in both localities which coated the reefs and cut down the visibility hampered the work and reduced the catch. However, it was our impression that the area was not very rich. As a non-marine sidelight, we found an intriguing plant on Pulo Besar. This was a vine of the milkweed family, Dischidia rafflesiana, which was rather common on the trees along the beach. The leaves were in the form of hollow pouches, each about three inches long, two inches wide and one inch thick, with a quarter-inch hole at the base. Each leaf was the home of hundreds of ants, and a poke with the finger brought these out in a boiling, infuriated mob. A few quick jabs at the leaves and the normal green plant was transformed into a swirling black mass of insects.

During the night of the 26th we headed north and were at anchor in the shelter of Cape Rachado next morning. Here we collected on the beach reef and in the adjacent mangrove area, but we found that the silt was a hampering factor here too. Our stay was not long since we wanted to get through the narrow southern portion of Klang Strait that is the entrance to Port Swettenham before dark. We left the Cape a little before noon and dropped anchor in Port Swettenham shortly before sunset, to find ourselves in the midst of a surprisingly large number of big ships from all over the world. Port Swettenham seems small and insignificant, but it is the port of Kuala Lumpur, the capital of Malaysia, and a lot of traffic crowds its narrow waters to support booming K.L., as the capital city is commonly called.

On Monday morning, October 28th, most of us went to K.L., some twenty miles away. I checked in at the American Embassy for a briefing and then went to the University of Malaya to meet the people in the zoology department. Dr. Dwight Davis, of the Chicago Natural History Museum, is Professor on a temporary appointment, and he has a group of seven lecturers working in various research fields as well as teaching. Since the University is only about three years old, the buildings are all new, well designed, and the equipment is modern. With only about two thousand students at present, the University is growing rapidly and is feeling some pain in the process, but I was very favorably impressed by the aggressive manner in which the challenge is being met.

Dr. Davis and Dr. A. J. Berry, a malacologist, took three of us (myself and two students, Bronson and Kelts) to lunch and showed us the town and National Museum. Everything was much more modern than in any other southeast Asisan city that I know, with new modern buildings everywhere, well paved wide streets, excellent parks and a feeling of uncrowded space. I think Kuala Lumpur would be a nice place to live.

Next morning, in response to my invitation on the previous day, more that twenty people from the University came down to visit and inspect the ship, and if vacation had not just started I am sure that there would have been many more. In the afternoon arrangements had been made for me to return to the University in order to explain our program to other departments and other interested people. The latter included Dr. J. B. Alexander, Director of the Geological Survey and Captain R. E. Gee, (both members of the Malaysian IIOE Committee), as well as some naval officers. I was gratified at the interest they displayed and at the number of penetrating questions that my exposition generated. After the meeting, Dr. Alexander and his assistant, Mr. C. R. Jones, drove me back to Port Swettenham. They came on board to inspect the vessel and stayed for dinner. As soon as they left, we got under way once more.

Dawn of October 30th saw us anchored off Pulo Jarak, a small densely wooded island far out in the Strait of Malacca. It looked very inviting, but I gave strict orders that no one was to land, since it was teeming with rats infected with scrub typhus. However, this did not stop our working in the adjacent waters, and we split into three parties; one collected birds at sea, one concentrated on algae and invertebrates, and one ran a poison station for fishes. All groups were moderately successful. In the afternoon, we pulled offshore a bit and occupied the first hydrographic station of this cruise. It was ragged, I fear. Then we took a trawl haul in thirty-five fathoms and brought up masses of sponges (to the great delight of Dr. Rutzler), as well as a rich assortment of alcyonarians, crustaceans, echinoderms, and numerous other invertebrates.

A night run brought us to Pulo Perak, well north of the entrance to the Strait of Malacca and far off shore, and also well out of pirate-infested waters. This island rises as a steep mound from depths of about fifty fathoms. It forms a strong contrast to heavily wooded Pulo Jarak since there is not a green leaf on it. The island is a rookery for sea birds, primarily gannets, and provides a perfect example of how animals can modify their environment. Since Pulo Perak is a bird sanctuary, Gill had to confine his shooting to offshore waters again. The rest of us tried to collect on the precipitous submarine slopes, but the algal and invertebrate collecting was not very profitable, and a poison station yielded only thirty-five species of fishes. In order to supplement the meager collections we took a bottom trawl close to the island in fifty-five fathoms and picked up such a mass of sticky gray-green mud that we had to wash most of it out with the fire hose before we could get the net on board. This catch was not rich either, but it contained a number of interesting organisms that we had not taken elsewhere. The mollusc people were pleased with several species of scaphopods (tusk shells) and I was delighted to get some blind gobioid fishes of the genus Trypauchen.

On Friday, November 1st, we dropped anchor off Phuket, Thailand, and waited for the port officials to come out. They did not arrive, and Capt. Olsen and I finally went in with the ship's papers in a small boat. Our first contact on shore was with Mr. Roy Greenwood, manager of the Tongkah Harbour Tin Dredging Co., who was kind enough to place a car and driver at our disposal. Off wo went in search of the Chief Customs Officer, and as soon as we located him, we learned that the Thai Government had waived all formalities in our case, and we entered Thailand with the greatest of ease and dispatch. It was a very pleasant experience. Then came the hunt for the Thai scientist who was supposed to meet us. We asked the Customs Officer, the Governor, the Chief Fisheries Officer, our ship's agent and even inquired at the hotel where he would probably stay. No one had heard of him. Finally I telephoned the American Embassy in Bangkok only to learn that he was supposed to be in Phuket. On Saturday we got a telegram saying that he had come to Phuket on the 24th, waited for several days and then returned to Bangkok. Unfortunately there had been some confusion in communications regarding our changing schedule, and we had to sail without him, but we sent a radio to Bangkok inviting him to join us at Ranong if possible.

On the evening of our arrival at Phuket, most of the ship's company went in to the beach for an annual festival. It was the night of the full moon when everybody set small circular rafts, decorated with gaily colored paper and each bearing a lighted candle, afloat on the shore just at high tide. As the water ebbed, the colorful rafts drifted out to sea like tiny lightships, each bearing with it the launcher's accumulated troubles of
the entire year. All sorts of merchants had set up decorated stalls to sell every imaginable thing, and there was native Thai music and dancing. Those who attended said that it was a very delightful affair. I was chagrined because I had spent so much time trying to locate our Thai guest that I had to stay on board and catch up with my work. The only things I saw on my way back to the ship were the stalls being set up, the gathering multitude, and some of the rafts on sale.

Sunday morning, bright and early, we were at the Similan Islands, and on Goh Huyong we found the kind of place that we had been looking for. Diving in good clear water showed vast quantities of several different species of the alga Halimeda. They were so abundant that the beach sand was largely composed of their calcareous remains. Since Dr. Colinvaux is here specifically to study that genus, she was ecstatic and ready to stay here indefinitely. Dr. Kohn found many more cone shells of many more species than he had encountered elsewhere, so his specialty was equally well served and he was also pleased. Mr. Gill banged away and did very well on birds, bagging, among other things, the strange Nicobar pigeon (Caloenas nicobarica) and the rare tiger bittern (Gorsachius melano-lophus. "the best bird yet!"). A poison station yielded about a hundred species of colorful reef fishes, by far the greatest number that we have taken at any one place so far. Everyone liked the place and was satisfied with the collections, so we worked it for two days, and we may hit it again on the way back.

Soon after leaving Goh Huyong in the late afternoon of November 4th, we took still another trawl haul in forty-five fathoms and got another catch differing markedly from those taken before. Each trawl haul and each station along shore brings new things into the laboratory that we have not seen before. The aquaria are crowded with all sorts of things under observation, and the laboratory is a madhouse, with people falling over each other and every available shelf space and most of the deck covered with plastic pans in which animals are being anesthetized, or hardened in formalin, or simply awaiting treatment.

November 5th, 6th, and 7th we worked Koh Sandarar Nua, the northernmost of the offshore Thai Islands, from which the southern islands of the Burmese Mergui Archipelago (forbidden to us) were clearly visible. The fact that we stayed three days indicates that it was also rich and interesting. Specimens poured in from attacks on beautiful coral reefs, offshore rocks, sand beaches, mud flats; even the dry land yielded birds and a viper, while collecting from the ship at anchor produced fishes and a lovely four foot black and white banded sea snake. We are quite swamped.

This cruise is much different from the Pacific crossing. We have had no long open-water passages on which we can set the pace of work at a reasonable tempo. We do our traveling at night, and each morning finds us at anchor in a locality that demands intensive field work. That is what we are out here for, so that is what we do, but the material piles up at an alarming rate and the lab is a beehive of activity. I try to sandwich in lectures in the evening when we are under way, but there is often material that has to be taken care of so that the results of the day's collecting will not be lost, and I am behind on the lecture schedule already. I am trying to double in brass by impersonating a physical oceanographer, but I find that it takes an astonishing amount of time to oversee the taking of a hydrographic station, to check out the students on making a bathythermograph cast or taking meteorological observations, or to supervise the reduction of the data taken. Oh how I wish Warren Thompson were back with us to do all that and to give the appropriate lectures! Since the senior scientists are concerned with different problems, they frequently scatter to different field areas, and the students scatter with them. I cannot be in several different places at once, but I have faith that they are picking up knowledge and techniques by direct experience. Somehow there seems to be very little time left for routine paper work, and I give fair warning that this narrative is going to get a bit thin. I can see that I will be unable to give as detailed an account as I have done so far; time is too short.

November 8th brought us back to the Similan Islands where we worked two stations. The first was Goh Similan, the largest of the group, and in the afternoon we hit Goh Huyong, which had so intrigued Dr. Colinvaux on the way north, once more. Both stations yielded rich collections.

Now we are on the way back to Phuket where, tomorrow morning, we expect to clear for Penang, Malaysia. It is necessary to go back there to refuel and pick up supplies before we start for Indonesian waters.
