TE VEGA EXPEDITION
GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT #14

Students and staff assembled as planned by January 14, 1965, in
Singapore, only to learn that the sailing was to be postponed—partly
because of slow work on the ship, and because of a transformer to be
air-freighted from California, but also because a lift-van of equipment
from Pacific Grove was delayed by the late arrival of the "President
Coolidge." This ship was hung up in Saigon harbor for a considerable
time.

We utilized the delay by visiting the old Portuguese and Dutch town
of Malacca, on the outskirts of which is a most interesting fish culture
experiment station, with fine new laboratories. Its director, Dr. Prowse
showed us around, and gave us, with his staff, a tremendous Chinese
dinner. The following day we took launches out to some islands west of
Singapore, where most of the students had their first experience of
tropical flora and fauna—as well as of tropical sun! On January 18,
a Singapore holiday, we saw the color and action of a Hindu religious
festival. Finally, on January 29, most of us moved aboard TE VEGA
(still in dockyard); on the twenty-first we sailed out to anchorage in
the roads, took on our remaining students, fuel, water, and provisions,
checked compasses, and the next morning we departed.

The northeast monsoon was blowing steadily as we moved into the
South China Sea, making some swell and chop, which put a few under the
weather, and gave everybody a chance to get adjusted to cramped quarters,
and to the extremes of temperature between hot decks and lab, and cool
staterooms. It had been decided, because of the delay in starting, to
omit the first call at Zamboanga, and use instead (on the recommendation of the American President Line office at Singapore) the North
Borneo (Sabah) port of Sandakan, as a base for our stay at Sibutu
(being only about 90 miles away). So we skirted the north shore of
Borneo for 5 days, seeing only distant high mountains, and the glare
of an oil refinery near Brunei.

A biological watch was kept around the clock, with customary records of flying fish, porpoise, many sea snakes, purple Porpita, and
masses of yellow Sargassum. Mats of the latter were frequently brought
aboard, and examined for their peculiar plant and animal associates.
Several good plankton hauls were made while the ship made its customary
noon-day stop for engine oiling. Salinities of the sea water were also
measured on the induction salinometer. These showed steadily increasing
salt content as we moved up the China Sea from the more dilute waters
of the Straits.

On the night of the fifth day, the large Philippine Island of
Balabac was sighted, and the tortuous Straits of Balabac negotiated in
the dark with radar and direct sight alone—all three of the light-
houses indicated on the charts being out of commission! The land smell
was fragrant with some tropical bloom, as we left the China Sea and
entered the Sulu Sea. For the rest of the day we saw outlying Philippine
Islands, and toward noon sighted the immense red bluffs which guard
Sandakan like two Gibraltars. We moved into harbor slowly, in gathering
rain, and had a real tropical downpour for two hours after anchoring.
There were good piers, and many freighters waiting to take on logs or
sawed timber. Forestry is the chief business of the region. Finally
the port officials came aboard, and we were cleared by evening.

Most went ashore to look around, finding a clean new town, mostly
built since the war, largely Chinese in population, but with a fascinating suburb consisting of Malay houses on stilts. Next morning, after business at the very modern and efficient agents building, one of the, students was X-rayed (no trouble) and fresh snake anti-venin obtained to replace some thrown out by mistake in Singapore. Some of us walked up the hill into the neat and attractive region where most of the
Europeans live, and a few were fortunate enough to see the new forestry
research laboratory, and a number of captive orang-utangs at a nearby
timber station. Such was the fine new town of Sandakan on the dark isle
of Borneo!

Cohen and some "ich-and-herp" cohorts took a Boston whaler across the bay, to find some interesting fishes, and Schuierer acquired a few frogs and toads ashore. Fuel and water were put aboard by four o’clock, and then, our ears having been filled with fearful tales of pirate raids, the staff decided to avoid Sibutu, our long standing goal in the southern
Philippines, and keep under the protection of the Royal Malaysian Navy, which is now patrolling the Sabah coast on account of the Indonesian
"confrontation." This patrol has effectively stopped the pirates as well.

We decided to work Darvel Bay, at the northeast tip of Borneoe, and specifically picked the island of Gaya (Pulau Gaia in Malay) which looked
as if it might afford good anchorage, and give access to nearby reefs.
This island is actually the nearest large one to Sibutu, being only about 40 miles (and a frontier!) away from that target. Therefore we changed our clearance to it, rather than the uncertain entry port of
Bongao on Tawi-Tawi. On Sunday, January 31, we slowly entered a beautiful bay with forest covered peaks, 1500 feet high, on three sides of us,
dropped anchor, and by 10 o'clock we were off in three Boston Whalers to explore the shores. One went to the reefs, the others to a nearby sand spit joining the main island to a smaller one. All hands were ready for this kind of "confrontation," since we had been having a week of evening seminars on the kinds of plants and animals likely to be found on Sibutu—and presumably on Pulau Gaya.

Many of them we immediately found, and during the next days Pulau
Gaya proved itself to be an excellent showcase of tropical marine biology. So much so that we have decided it would be a fine place for an equatorial marine station—or for the new Scripps vessel to spend some time. The sand spit yielded immediate treasures, Yonge finding two genera of bivalves very similar in outward appearance and habitat, but differing
In fundamental anatomy. As the tide fell they put on a most amusing
"jet d'eau" each squirting a stream six inches or so high while they close up shop for the day. In the afternoon, on the rising tide, thousands of brittle stars then appeared (upside-down) apparently to catch the thick scum which floated in, but perhaps just to re-oxygenate after their long hide in the crevices of the "clam-bed," waving their arms violently.
Blinks, meanwhile, had spotted just below this "clam-bed" some 109
square meters of an almost pure stand of Valonia—more than he had seen in 40 years of hunting this alga. Actually the clumps were large, but the cells fairly small, being of a species which does not produce large cells. However, in very shallow, hot pools not over two inches deep—and sometimes actually exposed, were hundreds of the very large cells of another species, formerly known as V. Forbesii, but now referred to the genus Boergesenia. He wished for apparatus to measure its electrical properties, but perhaps he can bring some home alive. It is certainly
tough, withstanding temperatures of close to 100°F., and greatly increase salinities.

At the same time Gonor was energetically assembling nudibranchs and other molluscs, Linda Kahan corals, Pearse echinoderms, Cleland algae, Eikenberry worms. Fell sponges, etc. etc., each according to his or her chosen group. The same region was revisited several times, with increasing collections and observations by the algologists and inverte-
brate zoologists. Meanwhile, the ichthyologists and scuba divers had established fish-poison stations, one in the sheltered bay beneath
towering cliffs, one on the outer side of the island where the reefs
were narrow, and another in a region of shallow pools. The first
yielded 75 species, the second over 90, and the third still more, making a total of over 200 species. Since this region has not been collected before, some new things may emerge. A seining expedition over sandy bottom brought in still different fish, though of few species.

Reefs and shores continued to yield fine hauls, and many took the
opportunity to visit the Japanese "factory" on Bohaydulong Island, at the east side of the bay, where pearls are being cultured. We had the manager and the radio operator aboard for dinner. The place is heavily fortified against pirates, but has had no raids for two years. An RAF plane passed close overhead one day. Otherwise nothing has been sighted but small Malay fishing boats.

Finally, and regretfully, but because of the exigencies of schedule, and of fresh water supply, TE VEGA had to leave Pulau Gaya on February 8, after a most rich eight days of collecting and observation. The reefs were mostly of the "patch coral" type, without the outer rampart cemented together by coralline algae—because there is protection in the bay against pounding surf. These we shall hone to see later as we sail southward. Everyone agrees that our chance selection for our first real station was a fortunate one, and we shall long remember the beautiful bay and cloud gathering peaks.

Now we pass into the deep Sulu Sea, for our two day run to Zamboanga,
where letters and iced Coca Cola await us. On the way we shall use the
Tucker trawl, and the bathythermograph to locate the thermocline, which
lies deep in this sea.

Following Zamboanga will come quite different water—the open
Pacific for nearly two weeks run down to New Britain. This will be
the subject of a very different report.

-Bolin
