TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 22 
Dr. Rolf L. Bolin

Pago Pago provided no new excitement, but the town was a place where we could purchase needed supplies for the long barren open stretches of ocean ahead, collect our mail, and quaff a last long cool beer or milkshake.

Early in the afternoon of Sunday, July 4, we sailed out of the lovely flooded volcanic crater that provides Pago Pago with such a perfect harbor. We coasted eastward along the southern shore of Tutuila under perfect conditions. It was a beautiful day of sunshine and fleeting cloud shadows patterning the steep green hills that rose behind the white line of driving spray where the brisk wind picked the tops from the thundering breakers.

Rounding the eastern end of the island we headed almost due north for Canton Island, and soon broke out the home-made high speed plankton sampler that the second engineer had built to Professor Hardy's sketches and specifications. Short trials indicated the need for simple modifications, which were soon accomplished, and we were in business. A half-hour tow yielded exactly nothing, and Sir Alister could hardly believe it. We tried again and again, and after a while a tow of one hour provided us with two somewhat mangled foramini-ferans (Globigerina). The net was at least working. After a while we caught a couple of arrow worms (Sagitta), and by then our eminent British colleague was fully convinced that we were actually traversing a real marine desert. However, he took heart in the slow progressive improvement in the catches and hoped for greener pastures toward the equator.

Since the Tokelau Islands lay almost directly on our route we took the opportunity to stop briefly at Fakaofo Atoll on July 6. This atoll consisted of a rough ring of about 30 small palm-covered islands surrounding a fair-sized lagoon. There was a native population of about 800, who, although there seemed to be more spacious and suitable locations, were all concentrated in a single village on one of the smaller islets. There was also a detachment of half a dozen New Zealand Army engineers working to build a landing jetty to facilitate the loading of copra, the atoll's only cash crop.

The local dignitaries, the chief, the native medical practitioner, the policeman, and the lieutenant in charge of the army detail came out in a whale boat to meet us and we made arrangements for work in the lagoon. They said that it would be better if we used their boat for the trip in, and we accepted and loaded up our gear. Although it was fairly high water we had a little difficulty getting in. There was no boat passage into the lagoon and we had to cross the algal ridge which characterizes the weather side of reefs. We grounded several times, but finally made it to the shore at the village, and we were thankful that we were not in our own boats. We carried our air tanks, flippers and face plates, our nets and tubs, our fish poison and formalin through the very neat and clean village that was laid out with coral-graveled streets in a rectangular pattern, to the lagoon shore. Here we loaded everything into two small landing barges hooked together, which were placed at our disposal by the army, and set out for the lee side of the reef where our activities would not affect the life of the village.

Unfortunately, the reef we found to work on was not very rich. Much of it was dead and neither the invertebrates nor the fishes were spectacular. We got nothing new, but we saw very clearly the effect of silting in lagoons. At the base of the reef parapets and around isolated coral heads fine white silt was slowly accumulating and choking out the corals under a blanket of material having the consistency of soft ice cream.

While we were working, the village had been preparing for our return. As we pulled in to the shore about 20 women paraded out to us in single file, each one bearing a plate with a fried egg and two deep-fried biscuits (hush puppies Tokelau style) with jelly, and a glass of some sort of soft drink. It was a marvelous friendly gesture, and as we ate, three old ladies, inspired by the festive occasion, entertained us with an impromptu dance that ended by their falling into the lagoon. Some of our party tried dancing also, and we, and all of the people of the village who formed a dense half circle around us, thought the whole affair was hilarious.

When it came time for us to leave we received gifts of woven baskets, shell necklaces, and cowries, thanked our hosts and loaded into the whaleboat once more. The tide had receeded considerably and the boatmen had to walk us out across the reef. We would be sitting high and dry one minute, and then a big comber would dash in while the boatmen held on in waist-deep water and then gained a few yards on the backwash before we sat dry on the coral pavement once more. As we approached the edge we could see the water pouring off the reef rim in a waterfall about three feet high before being smothered by the next breaker. At last we made it and everybody made a mad jump for the boat as we floated free and began to pull off shore in the gathering dusk. When we reached the ship we gave our new friends a few cartons of cigarettes as a small token of our appreciation and set off northward once more.

We spent considerable time rigging up closing gear for a one-meter plankton net and testing gear and took a 1000 meter hydrographic station. On our arrival at Canton Island we found the sea rich in life again and the air full of birds supported by the teeming plankton below. Instead of taking the ship at once through the entrance to the lagoon (which is noted for its fierce tidal currents and can be entered only at time of slack water) we lay off shore for two days and took surface and 60-meter hauls with one-meter plankton nets and deep hauls for meso- and bathypelagic organisms with the Tucker trawl. The laboratory was full of all sorts of interesting animals from protozoans and medusae to pyrosomes and fishes. Siphonophores with glassy nectocalyces, so transparent that they were invisible until lifted from the watery tiny deep blue Physalia from the surface: copepods of the genus Saphirina, gleaming like opals as they refracted the light; hyperid amphipods with gigantic eyes covering the entire head; pelagic snails (pteropods), swimming with flaps of great butter-fly-like wings; Phylosome larvae of spiny lobsters with disk-like bodies through which we could read print with perfect ease; the rare and primitive cephalopod Spirula, a living fossil and a relic from past geologic ages; Gnathophausia, the giant scarlet mysid from the deeps silvery hatchet fishes looking as if someone had taken a bite out of their bellies; black melanostomiatoids with beautiful luminous organs and fearsome saber-like teeth; all these and many more engaged our attention and made Sir Alister a happy man.

At last, late in the afternoon of July 10, we took advantage of the slack water to negotiate the tricky passage into the lagoon and tied up at the wharf just inside the entrance.
