TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 23 
Dr. Rolf L. Bolin

Canton Island, an Anglo-American condominium, is not much to look at. A bleak coral-sand island, it stretches as a narrow belt around an oval lagoon about nine miles long, which is open only through a narrow break at the western end. Twice a day the water rushes in through this pass like a raging river when the tide rises, and twice a day the river reverses itself on the ebb. The surging flow and the choppy six foot waves that it induces makes it impossible to enter or leave except at slack water. The equatorial sun blazes down on the white sand and gravel, relieved only by a very few stunted coconut palms and scattered isolated shrubs. It looks like a desert. When we first saw it, the desolate impression that I had gained on a brief plane stop 14 years ago was corroborated; we were sure we would not like it. However, we were made welcome by Mr. James Murphy, the island manager, who administers it and runs a satellite tracking station for NASA, He was so kind and helpful that we would have been happy to stay longer.

The island is the home of countless frigate birds, terns, noddies, gannets and tropic birds, so bird watching and identification became the order of the day. Fishes swarmed around the pier and were taken by hook and line. They provided material for Dr. Haderlie's work on fish parasites, and he pawed happily through smelly fish entrails until the wee hours of the morning, while we (and finally he as well) wondered why he had not taken up an easier and cleaner field of study. Oh well, everyone has his own hobby.

Mr. Murphy, when he heard that we planned to dive in the lagoon, warned us about the danger of sharks. On the other hand, Mr. Thomas Spencer, who spends as much time as he can in the water, pooh-poohed the idea that they were a hazard. The two points of view were explained to the students, and diving on Sunday was made optional, with a warning to those who were going into the water to keep a sharp watch and to be careful. Those who heeded MT. Murphy's warning were taken on a tour of the tracking station. They reported that it consisted of a fantastic array of instruments, computers and recorders for monitoring practically everything in a satellite, including the temperature, respiratory rate and heartbeat of the astronauts themselves. Everyone who visited the station was tremendously impressed by the staggering complexity of the installation and the speed with which it could function, but no one seemed to understand the details of its operation.

Those who were not disturbed by the shark warning found the coral reefs immediately inside the entrance to be beautifully developed and as rich as one could wish. The strong tidal currents kept them swept free of choking silt, and there was practically no dead coral in evidence. Surgeon fishes browsed on the minute algae, while big parrot fishes chewed off chunks of the coral itself with audible bites, leaving gouged-out depressions on the solid rounded heads. Big groupers lurked under overhangs at the base of coral ramparts; silvery jacks, two feet long, cruised majestically about; big halfbeaks hunted in schools with their backs practically awash, and their color was so close to that of the silvery surface that they were almost invisible and looked like insubstantial ghosts. Of course, myriads of butterfly fishes, damsel fishes, wrasses, squirrel fishes, apogonids, etc. swarmed above, around and through the thickets of staghorn coral or the fantastic gardens of vase like types and flaunted their incredible colors everywhere. No sharks appeared, and the worst damage we suffered were a few stings from the plentiful fire coral (Milliporina) and a couple from the large hydroid Aglaophenia cupressina, commonly known as "fire weed."

Since we saw no sharks on Sunday, everyone turned out at slack water on Monday for another diving and fish-collecting foray. This time two sharks did come around to look us over, but they gave us no trouble at all, and the day was a success.

After having repaired one of our pumps, topped off with fuel and water (distilled from the ocean and therefore expensive), visited the Canton Island Club for beer, music and bingo, taken in the free outdoor movie, we shoved off on the morning of July 13, the second anniversary of our departure from San Diego. In spite of rough weather that hampered our work a bit, things were going fairly well until, with more than a mile of cable out and the Tucker trawl on the end of it, the hydraulic motor that runs both winches emitted a series of blood curdling shrieks and groans, and quit. It was only after over-riding the supercharger pump that we were able to retrieve the gear. The engineers poured over the instruction manual, used all their tricks and swore majestically in an attempt to get it functioning again, but all to no avail. As a result, hydrographic stations and deep-water work were out of the question, and we would have to concentrate on the surface layers.

According to Sir Alister the wide-awake terns of Christmas Island breed every six months. Such a speeded-up reproductive cycle must be supported by an extremely rich food supply, in this case gained from the surface waters of the surrounding sea. The area in the vicinity of the island should be phenominally productive. Here was something we could examine, even with our winches inoperative. Accordingly we chose a more southerly course than originally planned and cruised eastward just a little north of the equator. Hauls at various times of the day and night with different types of gear towed on a long nylon rope kept us supplied with plenty of interesting material. The samples taken at night supplied us with a fair number of deep-sea forms which had approached the surface on their diurnal migration, so the situation was not too bad.

On Wednesday morning, July 21, we reached Christmas Island, which has the greatest land area of any atoll in the world. Its low flat 220 square miles of coral sand supports millions of birds of various kinds, about 300 Gilbertese Islanders who have been brought in to work the large and modern coconut plantation, and one lone European, Mr. Dudley Cook who serves as Resident Commissioner, Plantation Manager, Magistrate, and anything else that may be required of him. He is in fact King, and he rules over Fanning and Washington Islands to the northwest as well. After presenting our papers, having a nice visit at the residency, and inviting Mr. Cook to dinner on board, we returned to the ship, and some of our people went exploring on the coral reefs. That night we had a perfectly fantastic aggregation of swirling animals around our night light. An almost solid sphere of megalops larvae of crabs surrounded the submerged electric globe, and a single unaimed swipe with a small fine-meshed dip net would bring up a solid cupful. Numerous small fishes were feeding on the larvae, foot-long jacks hung a bit farther out and took the small fishes, while several porpoises cruised back and forth and gobbled an occasional jack. This was the first time we had ever attracted porpoises to the light, and they were doubly interesting since one of the adults was accompanied by a young one about half its length, which swam close to mamma's side and faultlessly matched her every twist and turn. It was a performance worthy of a trained ballet dancer, and a fine show.

Next day diving and fish collecting occupied the morning, while in the afternoon as many as could pile in Mr. Cook's Land Rover visited the tremendous bird rookeries where mile after square mile was covered by literally millions of terns and tropic birds nesting on the ground and frigate birds and boobies in the scattered bushes and small trees. They were so fearless that it was possible to pick up several of them. Of the twelve birds previously reported from the Island, we were able to observe ten, and in addition we saw two more not previously recorded.

An inventory of the fuel situation by the Chief Engineer brought the sad news that we would not be able to do all the work around Christmas Island that we had hoped to if we expected to keep our motors and generators running until we reached Honolulu. As a consequence, on the morning of July 23 we left our anchorage and began a one-day circum-navigation of the island taking hauls with the five-inch phytoplankton net, the one-meter plankton net, and the neuston net at intervals. That night we set our course for Fanning Island where we had been informed that we could get 5000 gallons of fresh water.

At Fanning, a beautiful atoll with a well-run coconut plantation of about 2500 acres we were well received by MT. Philip Palmer, the Manager and only European, who has spent more than 30 years on the island and loves it. The single narrow entrance boasts tidal currents that rival those at Canton Island, and we were not able to get in until about four o'clock Sunday afternoon. Exploring, diving, collecting in the shallows, and partaking of Mr. Palmer's generous hospitality occupied our time pleasantly and profitably enough, but it was a bitter disappointment to learn that instead of the 5000 gallons of fresh water that we had expected, only a little over 500 gallons was available. This bearly improved our critical shortage. On the slack high water of Monday we departed, abandoning all thought of stopping at Palmyra where Dr. Banner, of the University of Hawaii, had requested that we collect specimens of snappers for his studies on fish poisoning. Instead we set sail for Honolulu, forbidding all showers and washing the dishes in salt water.

Work consisted largely of neuston net hauls. This net, fastened to a frame consisting of two water skis, skims the very surface of the water and collects a specialized fauna of blue siphonophores, blue jelly fishes, blue copepods, etc., at least during the day time. On a series of hauls taken every two hours during the night it collected not only flying fishes but lantern fishes and even a deep-sea stomiatoid of the genus Astronesthes. We knew that these organisms approached the surface at night, but had not realized that they were so prevalent in the upper two or three inches that we could catch them there in numbers. Towed at full speed, the gear took a tremendous beating when the waves were roughs.  It was damaged a couple of times, and once we almost lost it when it broke loose. On being retrieved we found that one vertical vane had broken, and half of it was missing. The net was patched up and the work continued, but eventually we struck the strong northeast trades and the heavy seas that they induced, and we had to stop the neuston work. However, the winds helped us on our way, and we reached Honolulu on August 2nd, one day ahead of what we had figured, and still with water enough for everyone to take a slight damping down as a substitute for a real streaming shower.
