Te Vega Cruise 12 Narrative (No Installment Number).  This was originally hand-written and no author mentioned.  



Like Expedition 11, this one can be divided into three parts 1) indoctrination cruises, 2) a transect perpendicular to shore and 3) work in the basins of Southern California.  

The indoctrination cruises off Monterey Bay were two in number.  Two hydrographic stations were occupied and 15 Tucker trawl hauls were taken to correlate with them.  In addition, hauls were made with the Neuston net and two with the Clark-Bumpus sampler.  

Since weather promised to be better than on previous occasions, another attempt was made to take a line of stations to a position 500 miles off shore.  As a device for effectively using running time for processing of newly collected data and specimens, the sequence of the stations was staggered on the outward and inward runs.  Although gales did blow up, this occurred toward the end of the cruise and it was only the inshore hydrographic station and its correlated biological samples that were missed.  Four hydrographic stations and 15 hauls of the Tucker trawl was successfully accomplished, while two samples were taken by means of the Neuston net and two with the Clark-Bumpus sampler. 

The investigations in southern California extended from the region of Pt. Conception to that of the (Coronado ?) Islands and yielded data from 7 hydrographic stations, 48 Tucker trawls and 4 otter trawls.

On all of these expeditions the entire scientific party, consisting of students, marine technicians and senior scientists worked together in an attempt to merge all of the varied data collected into some sort of an intelligible picture.  While this is far too complicated to attempt to present here, a few of the broader outlines may be mentioned.  

1.  From the California coast westward for at least 500 miles there is a marked increase in the amount of oxygen in the more superficial layers (from about 3 ml/L to about 5 ml/L at 100 meters), while there appears to be a slight tendency for the core of the oxygen-minimum layer to descend somewhat toward the west.  These phenomena may be induced by upwelling.  
2.  In the coastal waters from Monterey to Mazatlan the amount of oxygen in the minimum layer is gradually reduced somewhat less than 0.5 ml/L  to a little less than 0.1 ml/L, and the level of the core of the layer rises from approximately 750 m to about 400m. The pattern was duplicated in inshore and offshore waters, but may well change further to the west.  
3. The oxygen in the deeper waters of the southern California basin is conditioned by the depth of the sill and is uniform below this level.  The same phenomenon characterizes the temperature distribution and stagnation is clearly indicated.  
4. Numerous organisms have either horizontal or vertical limits of distribution in the waters studied.  These limits may be fixed by any one or by a combination of parameters, and the analysis to determine the effectiveness of any one is difficult.  However, indications are beginning to appear that certain animals are regulated in their distribution by oxygen tension, and that some of these organisms may prefer extremely low concentrations.  

