TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE—INSTALLMENT 3

American Samoa and the Samoans were kind to us. We cruised into the extinct and flooded volcanic crater that is Pago Pago Harbor just ahead of the Matson Co. freighter SONOMA and tied up to the fuel dock on Saturday afternoon, August 17th. While waiting for completion of the formalities that would permit us to step on shore, friendships were born with a number of the local people who had come down to the dock to look at the ship, and we soon had an invitation for the entire ship's company to attend a Polynesian party at the local club that evening. Most of our group made a quick trip to town for lava-lavas and strings of shell beads for costumes for the evening, and it turned out to be a gay affair; a welcome break after the long run down from Honolulu.

Sunday was a free day. Some of the students went swimming or scouting for favorable places to dive on Monday, but were discouraged from the latter activity by the appearance of large sharks. Practically everyone had an opportunity to take a trip into the countryside and visit some of the native villages. The three faculty members were taken for a jeep ride to the end of the road along the very beautiful southeastern shoreline by Dr. A. H. Banner, of the University of Hawaii, who is conducting a summer institute of science for native Samoan teachers.

On Monday, under the guidance of Mr. Thomas Annastas, the local Fisheries Officer, the entire scientific party occupied a poison station for fishes. Since he is trying to discourage the use of poison by the local inhabitants, Mr. Annastas took us to the only possible place where we would be sure to encounter no natives, and where we could work to our heart's content without providing an unfavorable example. This was immediately adjacent to a recently constructed airstrip, and, unfortunately, the area had suffered from dredging and filling. In order to approach the place, we had to pass through a very narrow pass in the reef, but under the expert pilotage of our guide the whaleboat and three Boston whalers made it without mishap, although we had an exciting bit of surfboarding going in and almost as interesting a time going out. In spite of conditions that were far from perfect, the station yielded about 80 species of colorful reef fishes, butterfly fishes, damsel fishes, surgeon fishes, goat fishes, wrasses, parrot fishes, puffers, gobies, tropical blennies, moray eels, etc., etc., most of them new and strange to students from temperate areas.

During the weekend, individuals and small groups from the ship were entertained by various people from the town, and in return the ship was inspected by teachers of the summer institute, by various administrators and scientists from the Department of Agriculture and the U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, by Dr. Robert Kaufmann, in charge of the Samoan Hospital (a person who impressed me as being from the same mold as the old surgeon-naturalists of the last century, who did so much to advance our knowledge of the biology of out-of-the-way places), and by numerous other people who were simply interested. Many would have liked to go with us on our continuing journey. On the other hand, we lost one crew member in Samoa. The Chef had become disenchanted with cruising in the South Seas and tendered his resignation. It was accepted and he was put ashore in Pago Pago. Jack, the second cook, became boss man in the galley, and we hired a Samoan by the name of Sam to wash dishes, keep things clean and make himself generally useful.

After getting fresh supplies and water we left Pago Pago on Monday evening, August 19th. Lectures, processing of the fishes from the poison station and discussing the catch, occupation of a hydrographic station and taking a deep plankton tow, which was very poor in contrast to our rich hauls in the region of the equatorial divergence, filled the time on our short run to Suva. On this leg, we lost Thursday Aug. 22nd by crossing the International Date Line, and so we arrived at Fiji's major port in the afternoon of Saturday, August 24th.

Saturday is a very poor day to arrive, since it means that no business can be conducted until Monday, but in Suva we did get one dividend. Sunday was the day of the annual Hindu fire-walking ceremony. Almost all of the ship's company attended. The participants prepared themselves by bathing for a couple of hours in the sea and then, clad in yellow and with yellow dabs of color on their faces and skewers through their cheeks, they jogged and danced along in the wake of two drummers, beating out a cadence with an accent matching a rapid human heart beat. They were led by various priests in colorful garb on a long trek to the temple of their sect. The journey took more than two hours and by the time they arrived, they were in a glassy-eyed frenzy. After a preliminary few minutes of jumping and dancing, they proceeded to walk barefooted across a bed of hot coals about 15 feet long. Faith alone was supposed to protect them from harm, and the faith of each individual seemed to me to be measured by the speed with which he crossed the pit of coals; some danced across in a great hurry, but a few strode deliberately and sedately. At any rate, it was an amazing exhibition of mass hysteria or mass hypnotism, but none of our group was impressed enough to join their sett.

On Monday, the 25th, again under the leadership of the local Fisheries Officer, this time a Mr. Warren, we made an expedition to a mangrove swamp across the bay from Suva. A lecture by Miss Bennett on this type of habitat had laid an excellent foundation, but the strange stillness and gloom of the narrow inlet up which we traveled in our small boats was impressive. The interlocking aereal roots reaching down
into the mud made it almost impossible to get away from the water, although some of the students did penetrate a short distance. Between tide marks, the roots were covered by small acorn barnacles (probably Chthamalus) and provided a foothold for small littorine and neritid snails and grap-soid crabs. A few hermit crabs occupied trochid shells, although how these shells came to this muddy habitat is somewhat of a mystery. They must have been carried up from the cleaner bay by generation after generation of hermit crabs. A few small mangrove mussels and oysters completed the visible and collectable invertebrate fauna. We tried a little fish poison in the opaque muddy water that looked as if no respectable fish would live in it, and we were rewarded with 30 species of fishes belonging to 17 different families. Scatophagus, Monodactylus, mullets, anchovies, gerrids, leiognathids, hemirhamphids, etc., contrasted strongly with the fishes that we had taken on coral reefs, and provided grist for a lecture a couple of days later.
The usual hospitality to visitors that we have learned to expect from the peoples of these Pacific islands was enjoyed by all on board, and in return we displayed the vessel and told of our program to numerous officials, local scientists and teachers, and to a group of Fijian students about to enter universities in New Zealand.

In Suva, we lost two students who had to return to the United States. Robert Beeman had a teaching commitment that he could not be sure of meeting if he continued further, since we are entering an area where air travel is sketchy and distances are long. His departure is one of the unfortunate results of our much delayed start. Richard Conrad has been suffering from intestinal upsets ever since we left Hawaii. It was deemed unwise to take him into the primitive areas that we are entering where medical aid would not be available for long periods, so he too was sent back. Most of the others will have to return from Rabaul in order to enter their home universities for the fall term. We shall reach Singapore with a skeleton crew, the faculty down to two, since Dr. Thompson will also have to leave us in Rabaul, and the students reduced to four.
Shortly after noon on Tuesday, August 27th, necessary repairs and modifications of the refrigeration and fresh-water distillation systems had been made, and we cast off and headed almost due south for Great Astrolabe Reef, which had been recommended to us as a very rich and spectacular coral area. We crept in through the narrow pass in the reef at dusk and anchored for the night in the shelter of Vanuakula Island. Here we took a surface plankton tow as the water drifted past and caught a few fishes with dip nets under a light. However, the wind whipped the surface, and it was difficult to see anything, so the catch was poor.

In the morning, when it was again possible to navigate in the lagoon, we continued on to Mbulia Island which we had been advised to use as a base. Here we split into two parties, Bolin taking one group in the Boston whalers to the outer reef a few miles east of the island, an area that had been particularly recommended, while Miss Bennett and Dr. Thompson led the others to the beach. The outer reef was very beautiful with many different kinds of living corals and myriads of small brilliantly colored reef fishes. The top of the reef was under only about 2 feet of water and sloped back gently into the lagoon, dropping off and giving way to sand at a depth of about 15 feet. This in turn formed a wide flat shelf before it sloped down into dark blue depths of 100 feet and more. We spent considerable time with snorkles or with aqualungs exploring the gulleys cut through the reef by the inflowing water, admiring the massive brown coral heads with tiny irridescent green polyps, the staghorn types of white with blue tips, golden yellow platters that were fragile when touched but which withstood the rapid water flow, small delicate hydrocorals of an appropriate coral pink, and many others. We picked up a few molluscs, but decided against a poison station, since the flow of water from the huge breakers crashing on the outer reef face was far too strong. It was almost as much as one could do to stay in one place, even with swim fins.

The group that went ashore on the island visited the native village and were cordially welcomed by the hundred or so people who lived there. It was very neat and orderly with houses of woven mat walls and thatched roofs. The village dignitaries sent a very formal invitation to a party that evening, as follows:

Bulia
28th August 1963 

To, The Captain of the "Ya TEVEGAR."

Sir,
We invite you and all your companions to be here tonight for dancing and drinking yagona.
We need if you arrive in our invetation you will be arrive onshore at 8 p.m. tonight.

Yours Faithfull 
The Village Adviser Manka Waga and the Chief of the Village Poasa Qeiri

It was with considerable regret that the Captain replied in an equally formal note, accompanied by a gift of cigarettes, that we were somewhat behind schedule and had to sail that evening so it would be impossible for us to attend. It would undoubtedly have been great fun to join in the dancing and the drinking of yagona, whatever that is. Perhaps we can do it some other time.

The party that had been to the outer reef stopped for drinking coconuts at the island on their return, and there met the other group. Everyone then joined forces and we ran a small poison station on a reef about 100 yards off shore. This was in shallow water, not more than eight feet deep, and most of the coral was dead. It appeared barren in comparison with the outer reef, but it yielded about 55 species belonging to 25 families and 11 different orders. Eight of these families, Plotosidae, Synodontidae, Syngnathidae, Acanthoclinidae, Carangidae, Clinidae, Tripterygiidae and Brotulidae were new to our collections, so the time and effort was not wasted. Besides, it was fun!

Off again that evening for Tikopia, or so we thought. We had been requested by the School of Tropical Medicine of the University of Sydney to get blood samples from the natives on Tikopia, the easternmost Pacific island to which malaria has penetrated, for a malarial survey under way. We had clearance for the island from London, but instructions to stop at Vanikoro or some other port of entry first. Pressed as we are for time, it will not be possible to waste three days backtracking from Vanikoro. Messages explaining the matter and presenting a request to stop at Tikopia first, since it lay practically on our course to Vanikoro, were not approved by the British Civil Service. As a result of a message received on the evening of August 29th, we are about to bypass Tikopia en route to Vanikoro. We are much disappointed, because Tikopia is very seldom visited by Europeans and is said to be almost unchanged from the old days. It would have been interesting to see.

On August 29th, we passed for about an hour through an area where there were widely scattered pieces of drifting pumice, probably washed out to sea from Fiji by the heavy rains of early this month, Tom Clarke managed to dip-net a piece of it about twice the size of my doubled fist. Along with it, he caught a few animals that provided a beautiful lesson in ecology. The pumice was black and was speckled with small white lepadid barnacles only about two or three millimeters long. These indicated by their size that the drifting rock had probably not been long in the sea. Perched on the pumice was a small crab, perhaps a shore form off on a journey to distant parts on his own little world. It is interesting to see dispersal mechanisms in action, and not just to talk about them. However, the nicest beast was a three-inch trigger fish (Balistes) that was netted along with the pumice. It was black and had white freckles just the size of the barnacles and spaced as the barnacles were on the pumice. In the aquarium, the fish always stayed immediately adjacent to the pumice and often pressed directly against it. At such times, it was practically impossible to distinguish the fish from a distance of one foot. It was one of the most perfect examples of background picturing on the part of an animal that I have ever seen. The fish blended perfectly with the pumice and appeared to have small barnacles growing on it; it was simply invisible. A student of biology has to be totally blase not to be impressed by such clear-cut demonstrations of the principles he reads about.

By August 31st, the Mbulia Island collections were pretty well in hand and we stopped for another hydrographic station and tried the modified Tucker net (now cut down to 10 ft. in width). This deep haul was very disappointing; it contained only one astronesthid, two small melanostomiatlds and a few bedraggled Cyclothone among the fishes, a couple of deep-sea amphipods, some Saiga, and a pteropod or two. A plankton haul on September 1st, with 400 m. pf wire out, was much better, with numerous small goodies in it. Most spectacular were a number of Stylophthalmus larvae of the deep-sea fish Idiacanthus. These are small eel-like larvae with the eyes at the ends of slender stalks several times as long as the head--the kind of thing that is pictured in Sunday supplements of questionable newspapers, but that one never believes in until one has actually seen a specimen.

On September 2nd, we arrived off Vanikoro in the Santa Cruz Group and put over the small boats to go ashore and get local information on the tricky passage through the fringing reef and the lagoon which was studded with coral heads. By the time we were at the pass entrance, we were met by a boat from shore carrying Bill Powell, the overseer of the lumbering operations on the island, who remembered me from my visit of six years ago and called me by name. He showed us the curving channel marked only by two oil drums for buoys and some white flags on a few sticks, marking segments of the range, and it was not long before TE VEGA was anchored a few hundred yards off shore in 15 fathoms. Captain Olsen, Miss Bennett and I went ashore in a Boston whaler with the ship's papers, and just before noon, with practically no formality, we were granted entry to the British Solomon Islands. The local European population, consisting of nine men and Mrs. Powell as the lone white woman made us welcome by providing cold beer (Vanikoro has an unsurpassed beer drinking climate) and arranging a buffet party for the ship's company that evening, replete with music by a number of guitar strumming natives. It was a fine affair.

We are now really in the Southwest Pacific, an area where both sexes go around stripped to the waist, the little children are stark naked, facial tatooing is common and pidgin English is the mode of communication. It is unintelligible to me, but the natives evidently understand that a sign reading "This haus tamboo ol boy." means “No admittance.” This example does not give a hint of the complexity, but it is the best that I can do.

Biological work consisted of taking plankton tows in the lagoon, visiting the mangrove area and making an expedition to the fringing reef where La Perouse lost his ships. The reef is marked on the charts as the Astrolabe Reef, named after one of these ships, and ashore is a recently erected monument to La Perouse, who met his death on the island. The reef was by far the richest and most spectacular we have seen so far; in fact, it is impossible to imagine anything better. Living corals of dozens of different genera created fantastic submarine gardens through which myriads of colorful fishes swarmed. Several species of crinoids were common, sea cucumbers of at least four kinds were seen, brittle stars and snails crawled here and there, tube worms spread their feathery spirals of tentacles, Tridacna clams displayed their colorful mantles of brown and blue and green but were impossible to pry out of the solid coral in which they were embedded. Trying to place my interest in fishes in the proper perspective, I have been looking for various invertebrates, but on each trip to a reef I am more and more impressed by the dominance of just two groups of animals, the corals and the fishes. They are by far the most conspicuous organisms, and their fantastic forms and eye-catching colors make it difficult to see anything else. While just watching the life around me, I had the fun of observing a small labrid fish, Fissilabris dimidiatus or a closely related form, busily ' picking parasites off a group of surgeon fishes (Acanthuridea). This is a well-known habit of several wrasses, but I had never seen the cleaning operation in the field before. Some of the students reported having seen the same labrid working on groupers and actually picking things from inside the mouth while the larger fishes obligingly gaped widely for them.

We could well have spent many fruitful days at Vanikoro, but the necessity of getting people to Rabaul in time for their planes home forced us to push on, and we left on the evening of September 3rd for Honiara where we will clear British territory.

This is September 5th, and by noon we had pretty well cleaned up the collections made at Vanikoro and were ready for more data and material. Consequently, off Cape Recherche, at the northwest tip of San Cristóbal Island, we made another hydrographic station and followed this with two plankton tows, one through a fairly well-defined deep scattering layer and another below it. Both were very successful, and the catches differed markedly. The upper one was heavy with the large pseudothecate pteropod Corolla, which flapped around like butterflies in our dishes and amazed everyone by their large gelatinous shells that were absolutely invisible in water. The lower haul was characterized by beautiful siphonophores and brilliantly luminous pyrosomes. The students are busy with this material as I write.

We are running under power through the Solomon Islands, over a low even swell, with a full moon overhead and just 'enough of a breeze to make the weather perfect. During the day, it was hot and humid, but the blue water and the lovely islands on both sides were almost enough to make those who had time to look forget their discomfort. I might add, for the benefit of those at home who envy me, that leading an expedition of this kind may be interesting, but it bears no resemblance to the TV version of a pleasure cruise in the South Seas. There are times when I should like to sit on deck with a tall cool Pimm's No. 1 in my hand and contemplate the folly of the men who turned this idyllic scattering of green islands on a sparkling cobalt sea into a bloody battlefield only a few years ago, or the folly of those who preceded them and sought fortunes at the risk of their necks in the notorious blackbirding expeditions that carried the natives off to virtual slavery. Unfortunately, I have no time for it. The days are taken up in lecturing, planning future schedules and activities, conferences with the Captain, writing letters in answer to the business that catches up with me in each port, supervising trawl hauls or leading field trips to the beaches, checking equipment, and a hundred other matters. There simply are not enough hours in the days, and the time for taking things easy over a drink is just not available. Besides, this is a dry ship.

This narrative is being written hastily for the benefit of numerous people to whom I do not have time to address individual personal letters, much as I would like to. Some might like it to be more detailed on the scientific end, some might like it to be more in the nature of a travelogue; I am simply trying to give you all an inkling of what this unique venture in education is like, in order that you may form some sort of an opinion as to its merit and value. My personal opinion is that it is successful now and will get better in the future when we do not have to worry so much about the miles still to go. To really know what it is like, you would have to be with us, to ogle at the catches as they come up full as Christmas packages of unsuspected treasures, to stand biological watch on deck in blazing sun or drenching downpour, to do chemical determinations while fighting for balance on a canted heaving deck, to glory at the fantasy of coral reefs with the aid of an aqualung, to try to concentrate on lectures while the sweat drips off your nose and the paper on which you are taking notes gets soggy and sticks to your arm, to feel the life of the ship as she heels over and steps out at twelve knots under a brisk wind, to accept the proffered friendship and cooling beer of the European expatriates in the ports of call, or the equally welcome friendship and equally refreshing drinking coconuts offered by the delightful natives who have not been spoiled by too much civilization. If you have any criticisms, suggestions or comments, why not drop me a note, to arrive by October 11th, addressed as follows:

Dr. Rolf L. Bolin
Research Vessel TE VEGA 
c/o Mr. W. G. Thurston, 
Mezzanine Floor, 
6 Cecil Street,
Singapore 1.
