TE VEGA EXPEDITIONS
GENERAL NARRATIVE - INSTALLMENT 17

TE VEGA Cruise 7 was supposed to leave Honiara, capital of the British Solomon Islands Protectorate, as soon as possible after the arrival of Dr. Robert Bieri and 12 graduate students on March 30. However, instead of the expected influx of scientists we received a radiogram informing us that the party had been forced down at Munda by bad weather. This was not surprising since at least Guadalcanal had been drenched by tropical downpours for several days. Next morning we learned that our group had been further immobilized by trouble with the plane's electrical system, so it was not until April 1 that they arrived, were welcomed on board, indoctrinated in the ship's routine, and briefed on the program.

It was not until April 2 that we could depart for Rennell Island to pick up our final faculty member, Dr.Torben Wolff, who had been there for three weeks completing natural history investigations that he had initiated and pursued on two previous visits. Rennell is one of the Protected Territories, and we required special permission to go there and a medical inspection and spraying immediately prior to departure. The local government also requested us to transport a number of Rennellese natives back, since ships seldom visit the island. We carried 13 of them as deck passengers— all that our life-saving equipment would permit.

The trip was uneventful, and next day we dropped our guests at two villages on the south shore. As we were riding at anchor at the second place a canoe approached bearing two natives and a bearded and disreputable-looking white man—the eminent Dr. Torben Wolff of the University of Copenhagen. In his inimitable way he immediately became the effervescing center of the ship. Before he had been on board two hours he had launched a lecture on the history and geography of this fascinating place.

Rennell Island is a Polynesian outpost in Melanesian waters and was practically unknown to white man until the third decade of the present century. It is an elevated atoll with the ancient rim of the reef now at an altitude of a little more than 100 meters. The central part of the island is the old lagoon floor, knobbed with long-dead coral heads and slightly tilted so that its eastern end holds Lake Tageno, about 17 miles long and some 6 miles wide, the largest lake in the Pacific. This lake still has a subterranean connection with the ocean, but the heavy rainfall keeps it almost fresh. It contains a number of endemic organisms and some relict marine forms that have managed to survive the drastic reduction in salinity.

On Sunday, April 4, we all went to see the lake. This involved a climb up the almost vertical cliff, using hands almost as much as feet, and a descent on the other side that was not very much easier. The old coral was almost as irregular as that on the fringing reef today, and even in the few places where enough soil had accumulated to hide the limestone, roots of trees sprawled in net-like patterns over the surface to make the footing extremely rough. It was really tough going in the humid heat under the dense vegetation where no sea breeze could seep through. Incredibly, the natives who carried our food and equipment took it all as a lark. Two even carried an outboard motor between them up that unbelievable trail, and they did it in their bare feet! I found it an exhausting trip and was not ashamed to lag a bit behind.

Coming into a clearing where the natives had planted taro, sweet potatoes, cabbage and coconuts, I found our party stopped and mingled with a goodly crowd from the village of Hutuna that had come out to meet us. Here I was treated to one of the nicest receptions that anyone ever had. Someone handed me a drinking coconut and I took a long refreshing swig. Between 20 and 30 children ranging in age from about 5 to 12 formed a compact semi-circle in front of me to watch me drink. Then Wolff said, "How about sing for big fellow master" and immediately they burst into loud and astonishingly melodious voice. It was impossible to make out most of the words and they may have been Rennellese, but at intervals "Happy WELL come" came through loud and clear. Torben had found time during, his busy stay on the island to become a great pal to the kids, and waving his arms like a conductor he led them through a marvelous concert, including "The Lady and The Crocodile" in English and with gestures. The gusto with which the songs were delivered, the flashing eyes, the broad grins or the furrow-browed concentration on the little brown faces of those cute half-naked kids made a tremendous show.

At Hutuna Dr. Frost set up a clinic in one of the huts and treated a stream of patients for ailments of all kinds, while half of the village formed an appreciative audience. We examined Wolff's crude laboratory, his water-level gauge in the lake, his fancy insect trap, etc.; we had lunch on the grass near the shore of the lake; we went for a short canoe trip and saw the smallest cormorant in the world, climbed a hill for the view and visited bat caves, Wolff meanwhile keeping up a rapid-fire commentary on various aspects of the local geology, biology and anthropology. At last it was time to return, because we didn't want to negotiate that trail in the dark. When we reached the ship that night everybody collapsed and slept the sleep of the just—and the fagged out.

Monday was devoted to indoctrination into snorkeling and Scuba diving, to an introduction to the coral reefs close to shore, and the examination of the limited material collected. That evening Wolff discussed the natural history of Rennell Island and demonstrated the material he had collected during his stay.

On Tuesday morning preparations for a fish-poisoning station were interrupted by the capture of an eight-foot tiger shark, Galeocerdo cuvieri. by hook and line from the fantail. This was too large a specimen to preserve, but he did not go entirely to waste. His gills yielded a fine series of parasitic copepods for Dave Egloff, and the intestinal spinal valve was full of tapeworms which were preserved for Lorraine Morin who was with us on Cruise 4.

The capture of the shark and the opportunity to sense its strength and to examine its rather fearsome dental equipment brought home some of the points made in an earlier discussion of dangerous marine animals, but this did not dissuade anyone from participating in our fish-poisoning venture. We selected an area between two overhanging walls of coral that rose from a narrow sand-floored corridor at a depth of about 20 feet to within two feet of the surface. We spread the poison and within five minutes were joined by ever increasing numbers of people from the neighboring village. They came in all ages and both sexes, and when we did not have nets enough to equip them, they caught fishes in their hands and brought them to us. It was a grand melee with people swooping down from all angles in competition for the prey, and the fishes didn't have a chance. The catch has just been roughly tabulated, and we estimate that we took about 140 species. Since only 68 were previously known from the island and that list contains several species that we did not catch, and since we took another poison collection on shall sand bottom in the afternoon which we have not yet tabulated, there is little doubt that we shall triple the known ichthyofauna of Rennell Island.

On Thursday we left Rennell for a return to Honiara, and stopped briefly at Ballona Island, Rennell's little sister, to drop mail and some supplies for two Danish anthropologists working there. It was a lovely spot, but we could not stay. Our planned work lies to the east and we must be on our way.
