Letter Specific to Cruise 5; Narrative


R/V Te Vega,
At sea between Nicobar Ids and the N. tip of Sumatra
26 Nov 1964



Dear Rolf,
Our trip from Ceylon has been a productive one, and in terms of accomplishments has probably been the best leg of the voyage yet; partly due to weather partly to experience, and partly due to a clear picture of what remained to be accomplished.  

We sailed from Colombo at about 1400 hrs. on 19 Nov. That evening we met to discuss work left to do, and had one of the best group sessions we have had so far.  The kids want to aim at writing one single longish paper rather than three short ones.  We reviewed work needed to round off the project, and laid out a tentative schedule, with some reservations about the weather.  The next two days we made two trawls each, and worked them up; seas were roughish, but not too bad, and we have learned to handle both the trawl and the microscope work under conditions that would have seemed intolerable merely a month ago.  Sunday, 22 Nov, we devoted the whole morning to a seminar on the DSL, fitting in our findings as summarized to date (and still incomplete) with the results obtained by others.  Wourms, Ogden, Vicki, Sharon, and Wess Fielding carried most of the ball, with contributions and discussion by all.  They did a superb job…so good I’d like to see the thing updated and presented either at Stanford or as a symposium at a Western Soc. Naturalists Christmas meeting a year from now.  Can’t begin to tell you how pleased I was.  The last item on the program was presentation of the food web for the DSL region organisms, in so far we have it put toegether so far.  It is still from complete, but it seems to me to be the first qualitative food web for a blue water pelagic community I’ve ever seen anywhere, barring the elementary diatoms-to-copepods-to-fish etc. over-simplifications given in texts.  I hope the final version will be better, though food studies for some of the crustaceans have been a real problem.  The night of the 22nd we passed through a magnificent display of luminescence, mostly caused by large Pyrosomas and large numbers of the Venus Girdle ctenophore Cestum.  We stopped the ship and dipnetted around a night light for a while (incidentally, those submersible lights obtained from Cincotta Bros in Monterey have worked out very well; one we rigged for a night light, the other was needed for a running light for the ship and is used as such now).  The Pyrosomas were the sort mentioned in the Challenger Expedition reports, where Carpenter wrote his name with his finger and had it come out in letters of green fire; the blaze a really brilliant green at night.  The sea had calmed greatly by Sunday night, and we were able to dipnet Myotophids and leptocephalus larvae as well as other things.  

On Nov 23 and 24 the weather continued to be very calm, and we interrupted our travel eastward to make trawls at 0300 and 0500 on the 23rd, and a whole series of four consecutive trawls at different times on the 24th, winding up the operations with a swim in the open sea over more than 2000 fathoms of water.  

The swimming was superb.  The water was liberally loaded with Cestum, Beroid ctenophores, salps, and other things and it was a marvelous treat to be able to see them under completely natural conditions.  I had no idea the extent to which Cestum was capable of serpentine wriggling.  There were other ctenophores as well, one beroid in general shape put trailing out at the sides a pair of the flaps looking like angel’s wings, apparently of mucus, for although they appear as definite structures, with a consistent form and appear to act as fins, they go to pieces when even touched.  We could only watch them, and could not even dip them up in a pan or bucket without destroying them.  Can’t seem to find any mention of anyone else even observing them.  We tried to get some underwater pictures of them, but photographing plankton underwater is an uncertain business.  

After securing from swimming we began a project deferred till now; a round the clock watch on the fathometer and asdio for the DSL, rather than discontinuous intervals.  We expect to burn up nearly all the wet tapes left aboard, hence that order of two cases for the Simrad machines had better come through in Singapore.  There was literally a festive atmosphere aboard, for while we still have work to do, we have made our last DSL trawls, and these were getting worked up fairly fast.  

The asdio-fathometer watch lasted through until 0700 on the 26th, with Bo and me standing the last 0100-0700 watch, but I am getting ahead of myself.  

On the 25th, while lying completely at rest with engines off in the calm waters a days run SW of the Nicobars, we continued the asdio watch, sorted and counted the organisms from the last few trawls, and swam about some more.  One or two sea snakes were sighted, and later in the day a shark.  The Skipper broke out a Boston whaler and went after it with a harpoon, but it was a hook and line that took it eventually.  We used the rubber boat I brought along as a raft from time to time and I think I’ll just leave it aboard as a gift to Te Vega.  

The festive spirit continued along with completion of the trawl work, and Brian McDade the Chief mate had decided to turn the 25th into Thanksgiving as long as the ship was simply parked at sea.  Lunch was cancelled, and dinner…turkey and all trimmings…was set for 4:00pm.  Early in the afternoon the faculty got to discussing things with the Skipper and the ships physician, and it was not long before we were in complete agreement that a celebration was not only quite timely but practically essential.  The ships physician, always conscious of the values of preventive medicine, prescribed two rations of spirituous liquor for all hands, and the skipper broke out the beverages confiscated from the late but unlamented cook and engineer, along with an un-opened bottle of Napoleon brandy that had been discovered.  We had a fine cocktail party in the lounge, complete with gifts from the students to the faculty and ships officers (where they came from I have no idea, there being no dime store for at least a thousand miles), including a yo-yo for me (to symbolize the rise and fall of the DSL, some jacks, and a ball for Maggie, a toy six-shooter for McDade, and so on).  The cocktail party was jovial but decorous, and was followed by McDade’s masterpiece, Thanksgiving dinner complete with turkey and apple pie.  Great feasts of trencherman ship were performed by all, and the asdio watch was regularly relieved to permit participation.  Bo and I sacked out early, for we had the last long watch.  Altogether it was one of the finest parties I’ve ever attended, and certainly the only one adrift on the glassy aters of the Bay of Bengal.  I agree completely that the Te Vega is best off as a dry ship, but I feel we did just the right thing here.  Wish you had been there.  

Bo and I enjoyed the watch, keeping track of the layering down as dawn approached; it was the first time I had watched minute by minute through the whole process, from a nearly solid surface scattering lasting till after 0400, to the peeling away of strip after strip to the daytime condition of three to five deep layers.  Toward dawn we began to drift into water where we were detecting bottom on the 0-1500 meter but the layer still behaved as it does over deeper water.  A few ships passed us, and I wondered what they would think of us, sitting dead in the water, with a skiff and rubber boat off our stern as if we were at anchor in a harbor.  

We secured the asdio watch at 0700 and went SW to deeper water, for we wanted to wind up blue water work with a really deep trawl, just for fun.  We put out a full 2000 meters of wire, more than the ship has ever put out so far (the deeper layers of the main wire are just like new) and got the trawl to 2000 meters.  The winch could easily have handled a greater load.  The haul was an excellent one, with plenty of deep water fishes for Maggie, and a variety of invertebreates; Gnathophausia, Atolla, Acanthephyra, and lots of others.  We worked on these while we headed toward Phuket.  We’ll be there in a couple of days, and hope to have the last of the DSL lab and field records completed before we get there, and also the food studies done.  

From here, our program will be; arrive Phuket Nov 28 or 29 (we will inform agent exact time later; he already knows approx. time).  Work Phuket area, with Thumnoon Sun-panish, until about Dec 7th. Drop him at Phuket, and head for Penang for fuel topping, which may take 1.5-2 days.  Then down the Straits of Malacca, to arrive Singapore on Dec 12.  Our mail to Penang will be forwarded to Phuket until about Dec 2, the rest we will pick up at Penang.  On the last lap from Phuket to Singapore we hope to get a good bit of preliminary writing done, and final mockups of most of our data and charts done.  Maggie has volunteered to be general editor of the DSL paper and handle the collections until identifications are checked, when they will be sent to USNM.  I will talk over plans for publ. with you when I get back.  

Looking things over, I’m satisfied what we’ve had a good trip.  We didn’t get done all the things I’d planned to do on the open sea, notably some hydrographic work, but with 2.5 of the weeks we’d planned to spend at sea spent instead in Mombasa, the Seychelles, and Ceylon, we had to out something, and I was determined not to out the parts essential to completing a good biological study of the DSL community; the kids are in agreement, I think.  We’ll try to do a bit off Phuket.  On the other hand, they have seen a lot more of reefs that I expected they would, and learned a lot about plankton and nekton, and have done a good job on a research project.  And I have certainly learned a lot about handling this kind of an operation, partly from colleagues, partly from making mistakes, party from sheer luck.  In some ways I wish I could have had the kids all together at HMS for 5 weeks before the cruise started, to bring them all up to some standard level before starting; shipboard (at least this shipboard) is a difficult place for “teaching’ in a standard sense, but it is a marvelous place to put into practice for a real purpose, techniques and knowledge that could be as easily (in fact a lot more easily and efficiently) picked up ashore before starting.  I realize this can’t be done, but the diversity of student backgrounds remains a problem, as does diversity in interest and ability.  One reason things have worked out so well for us has been that we have an unusually capable bunch of students, though the best is one hell of a lot better than the worst.  

I’ll add to this when we get to Phucket.  

28 Nov 1964

Coming into the bay to the east of Phuket and adjacent islands, which do look inviting.  Last couple of days have been over flat seas, and we’ve pretty well caught up on all the back work of sorting, identifying, counting species from all the last trawls, and have made some more progress on the food business.  This is the toughest part; sometimes we have organisms taken in hauls practically round the clock, and find that nearly all of them are empty.  I spent yesterday helping with Siphonophores, and did locate a good series of copepod nauplii in the gastrosooids.  But this AM I worked ever a good number of that needle-like amphipod Rhabdosoms, and with the exception of one good Radiolarian, and traces of goo of completely uncertain nature, they were all empty.  The rascals must eat something, but whatever it is, it leaves very little in the way of traces behind.  Maybe they eat tiny detritus, or otenophores, or something else that leaves little trace, or digest and eliminate food quite rapidly.  

We completed the outline for our paper, the whole thing, and hammered out differences in discussion last night.  It looks as though it ought to be pretty decent, tho I doubt we can get it all written and still have much field work here.  But if we have the basic data and interpretive charts all in mockup form, the final draft can be finished back home.  Maggie, bless her heart, has agreed to take charge of the final editing and will handle what needs to be done with the specimens before they get sent off to the USNM; we will keep them around until the paper is finished, and will return them to HMS from Singapore via the steel-bound shipping container, in one of our drums.  

Hope the Thai scientist has arrived in Phuket; I’ll go in today to see.  Also hope he is a biologist and not a hydrographer, as if he is he is going to be somewhat disappointed.

I have been over with the skipper and Bo a schedule designed to get us to Singapore on the 12th of December:

Arrive Phuket 26 Nov.
       Pick up Thai scientist, work shores and islands, dredge, etc., and general vicinity of Phuket…
Thai scientist  off ship in Phuket, 5 Dec 1964
Leave Phuket, a.m. 6 Dec.
Arrive Penang am 7 Dec; refuel, mail, etc. have brief liberty.
Leave Penang for Singapore pm 9 Dec.
Arrive Singapore 12 Dec.

Best Regards
Don (Abbott)



